March
10th.
Okay.
All day.
Good evening, everyone. I now call this meeting of the
South Portland City Council to order on
Tuesday, March 10, 2026. If you
wish to join me in pledging allegiance to the Republic that is the United
States, please do so.
I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of
America, and to the Republic for which it stands,
one nation under God, indivisible, with
liberty and justice for all.
For all.
Mr. City Manager, can we have a roll call, thank you.
Uh, yes. Councilor Scott.
Yes.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, Councilor Walker. Here. Councilor Coleman. Here.
Councilor Tipton.
Here.
Mayor Tipton, sorry. Um, Councilor Pride. Here.
Councilor West. Here. Councilor Matthews. Yes, sir.
Okay, well done. Thank you everyone for being here, and thank you to
everybody else who's with us this evening.
Um, I don't think we have anything to do other than to get rolling
into our workshop discussion.
Correct.
Yay. All right. Well, the first people up are our friends from
Metro. We're going to hear about bus routes.
We're gonna hear about potential future service expansion.
And later, we have a little council work to do.
Great. Thank you. It's good to be back.
Uh, once again, Glen Fenton, Executive Director for
Metro. Tonight with me is, Mike Tremblay, our Director of
Transit Development. And, yes, we have a, a few things to update you
on and, kind of give you some feedback on how things have been
going. Uh, as a reminder, South Portland voted to join
Metro as a member community and merge, transit services
in December of 2024. And so we're a little over
a year into that, merger. Uh, so
tonight we'll provide an update on the merger.
We'll also provide some information on how service has been
performing, and some other initiatives that Metro is working on, and then
we'll walk through some service planning work that's been done and, possible
outcomes of that work.
First, on the merger itself, just want to report back that the eight
employees that came over to Metro from South Portland are still with Metro,
happily employed, and everything is going well with them.
Uh, service con- the South Portland service continues to operate reliably.
Um, no major changes have been made to that service, as was promised as part of
that merger. Um, South Portland board members have become very active
on Metro's board of directors, with, them taking leadership
roles. Uh, most recently, Linda Comb was
as- was, elected to Metro's vice president, so, we're very
grateful for the board members that you have provided to us.
Um, and the federal grants that were South Portland's are slowly transitioning
over to Metro. Not-- That's not totally done yet, but we're working through that
with our friends at the FTA. Uh, and we're also working on a
triennial review on behalf of both agencies.
Um, this year is our year for our triennial review.
So, things going very smoothly with the merger
itself. Uh, other updates from the organization,
we continue to work on designing a bus rapid transit system or
corridor between Gorham, Westbrook, and Portland.
Um, that is in a preliminary design phase, where they're working on the actual
station locations and that service.
Um, we'll be moving that forward later this year with a, a recommendation for
preliminary design, so more to come on that.
Uh, we're working on plans for a new operations and maintenance facility as we are
outgrowing or have outgrown our current facility, so, preliminary
planning beginning on that new facility.
Um, not much to report there. Again, in the preliminary stages, but we are working
on it. We'll be receiving new buses this summer, five new buses coming into
service to retire some older services and also to help support,
service expansion that we'll talk about a little bit later.
We're also undertaking a fare policy analysis, that's currently
underway. Uh, and I'll give you a little more information on that in just a
second. Uh, we're also advocating, at the state and
federal level for additional, funding support for public transit.
We're having, we've invited all of-- and it's hard to believe because there's a
lot of them. We've invited all of the current gubernatorial candidates for an
informational session at Metro. So far, we've had seven candidates, visit the
site, and we've been able to brief them on the importance of our service and
also, the need for additional su- state support to, to
assist with that service. Um, and then we're planning and working towards a
launch of a new service that will serve Scarborough and will pass through South
Portland, on its way to Portland, for later this year.
And again, I'll provide some more detail on that in a second.
Um, first, I just want to talk about the fare, fare policy analysis a little bit,
because I imagine as this information gets out, there's a possibility that
questions could come to you all about it.
Um, this is, uh-- it's been six years now since the
last, fare increase, in our region.
Um, and we have a regional fare policy that we share with Biddeford, Saco, Old
Orchard Beach Transit, so they're a partner in this, this
analysis. Uh, so the goals of the analysis are, of course, to increase
revenue. We also want to make sure that our fare policies are incen- are designed
to incentivize ridership, so folks that ride more, pay
less. Um, and we wanna make sure that we're taking, steps to
protect those frequent riders and the folks that, access reduced
fare. Um, and so, one otherElement to that that
I, I forgot to mention is that we'll also be launching open fare payments, which
we're really excited about. That's, tap-to-pay, so those touchless credit
cards that everyone has, or Google Pay or Apple Pay.
We'll be able to accept that on the bus later this year.
So we think that's gonna be a real game changer for getting people to try the bus.
Uh, so often a barrier, the first thing that people say when they, they're asked
why they don't use public transit is they, they don't know how to pay.
So, this is, an exciting thing that we're really, hopeful will,
will, increase ridership and, and ac- give...
provide access to a lot more folks.
Uh, so next steps on the fare policy analysis, we'll be doing public involvement
hearings both in person and virtually in April, with a plan
to be, made in coordination with our partners at BC
Transit in May, for approval, would be by our full board
in June with, implementation coming thereafter.
Depending on, what the recommendations are, we'll have a better idea on when
any changes might be made, but we expect that to be later this summer.
Um, ridership update. So, ridership
down a little bit from 2024, about 8% down
system-wide. South Portland's ridership was about the same as it was
previously, or, I should say, followed that same trend, about
201,000 rides on South Portland routes in
2025. Um, so far, '26 has been,
we had-
Make it easy
... so a bit of down ridership in January, but some improvements here
recently. Um, so wanted to provide a little bit of
detail on where folks are riding in South Portland and what kind of usage you're
seeing. Uh, so this chart shows, um...
And we just kind of grabbed some neighborhoods.
We didn't go by specific stops because there's so many bus stops in the system, so
tried to group these by, areas.
Uh, the bars show you the ridership by, neighborhood, and
then the actual line you see there is the amount of service that's provided to that
neighborhood, in trips per week.
So, you can see that in the Knightville-Mill
Creek area, in the Mall area, we're seeing the highest amounts of ridership.
Um, Kn- Knightville, of course, here you're seeing a lot, a lot
of... Your most service is provided to this area.
Uh, the Mall area, you're actually ex- exceeding the amount of ridership
per service. Um, and then the Brick Hill area is,
is actually also outperforming, the amount of service provided to that
area. And as Mike gets into the service planning, in the second half of this
presentation, we'll talk a little bit more about how, we hope to,
take advantage of these trends and improve, ridership.
Um, and then some of these areas we're seeing are, underperforming, right?
So, the Ocean, Ocean-Sawyer area,
definitely lower than the amount of service that you're seeing in there.
Not necessarily surprising based on the density in that area.
Um, but we do see that and Cash Corner underperforming a
bit. Uh, on schedule adherence, we're happy to
report that schedule adherence has improved.
Um, there's only, I think, about 10 months of data on this chart.
That's because we had to install the new technology that tracks our on-time
performance on the South Portland buses. Um, and so that took a little bit of time.
So this is kind of a, a short, look at on-time performance, but I'm
happy that the trends are moving in the right direction.
We have made some schedule adjustments, most of them minor,
but aimed at improving schedule adherence, because that's
really, uh... It, it drives, again, drives ridership.
If people can't count on the bus being on time, again, they're less likely to ride.
Um, but I think we can, we can and need to make more improvements in this
area, as our goal is to be 90%, system-wide,
90% or better, I should say, system-wide for on-time
performance. Um, so I, I
mentioned earlier the, the service in Scarborough, and we'll, we'll
talk about it and, and how it relates to the planning efforts here in South
Portland. Uh, but I want to provide a little bit of background on that project.
Um, initial planning for it, started early last
year, and I would say, at least in part or maybe in large
part, that, the beginning of that conversation was based on
the merger of Metro and South Portland.
Um, Metro became more of a neighbor to Scarborough, and so,
there was interest there in exploring, what possible,
service Metro could offer. Um, so based on discussions with
staff, we discussed their goals and their needs over there for public transit.
I mean, for those of you who don't know, there's very limited, existing public
transit options in Scarborough. Uh, there's the Biddeford bus, which runs about
every two and a half hours, so very infrequent.
And then, of course, there's the, the, 24 service that just barely
touches the, the Walmart area of Scarborough.
Uh, so after those discussions and understanding what their goals were, we
reached, we,
reached out to, PAX and applied for discretionary
funding. We received about $1.3 million from PAX in
discretionary funding for, additional service in Scarborough.
We also worked with the Maine Turnpike Authority to gain funding from
them, about 3.5 million in support from the Maine Turnpike
Authority over the next, three years.
So those funds primarily are, are what's helping launch the pilot of this
service. Um, and so after that, we, began a
public outreach campaign to really get into the nuts and bolts of what that route
might look like and those services, that they need to get a better
understanding of the needs. Um, part of that process included, public
outreach in South Portland. Because the communities are so close to one
another, we can't look at, transit planning in a vacuum, so we
wanna understand, where people are traveling and how those,
those travel patterns are, crossing that, that border especially.
So that was a large part of, of the planning process and, and helped not
only inform this route, but some of the work, again, that, that Michael will be
explaining here in a minute about our plans for, possible service improvements
here in South Portland. Um, after that, we took that
feedback. We are currently in the process of,
doing the, the actual service plan, which will include the routing, the,
bus stop siting, the scheduling, and then we, we plan to launch
that this summer, ideally as early as July, but possibly
as late as September.Um, and this is a, just a concept of
what that route, will look like. I think it's probably very close to this.
Uh, you can see that it'll serve, Main Street Route 1 corridor
in South Portland and, and in Scarborough.
Uh, and then it'll serve, the Downs as well as the park and ride at,
Exit 42. Um, it'll come across the Veterans Bridge
and serve the VA outpatient clinic.
Currently, there's no service to the VA.
That was another goal of this project, was to get service to the VA.
Um, and so we're really happy to be able to provide that as part of this.
And then it'll connect the route to downtown
Portland. Um, so looking forward,
regarding this route. So the route's fully funded for the first two years.
Um, there's a possibility that it may be funded, there may be enough funding to go
beyond the first two years. Um, we'll have a better idea once we finalize the
service plan. Um, at the, near the end of that pilot phase, we will
be reporting back to the council, to not just South Portland's
council, but to the other communities as well, on the performance of the
route. How, how many people are riding, how, how many trips are
we, we, providing, what is the on-time
performance, and then a cost estimate for what the local assessment might be
to continue that service. Um, as a reminder,
Metro's formula for, for cost allocation is based on the
amount of service in each community.
So, for this route in particular, it's a relatively
small amount of South Portland, that we looked at.
I think it's 20-
28 or 29.
About, yeah, about 28% of the route is in South Portland.
The remainder of any local assessment would be for the communities in which it
runs, largely in Scarborough and in part in Portland.
Uh, so again, we'd be reaching out to all of the communities to make sure that
there's support for continuation of the service, again, all based on our own
recommendation. If the service is underperforming, we may come back with a
recommendation to d- to discontinue the service after the two-year pilot
is complete. Um, if it is approved, we would
determine what the cost... We would roll that into our regular cost allocation
every year, and it would become part of the assessments in
2028.
Okay, I'll pass it off to Mike for the planning.
Good evening, everybody. I'm Mike Tremblay.
I'm the Director of Transit Development at Metro, and I'm here to talk about,
the goals of the process going forward.
So, I'm not gonna get into what the, the current service
does and, and wh- and where the South Portland buses, serve today,
but I wanted to, provide kind of the, the, the vision forward.
Um, we wanna continue to provide a citywide bus service that brings South
Portland residents across town, but also to regional destinations.
Uh, and ideally in a way that is more frequent and faster for those,
for those passengers. Um, and we're under the, the assumption that
the local investment will be the same as it has been in previous years.
We're not assuming a funding increase, at least not, for the first few,
options I'm going to present.
Uh, and then I'll, if there is potential for a future
investment, then we wanna have a plan that is scalable, that we
can simply add additional buses to the same route and achieve better
frequency or, expand hours of operation or, or, or other
improvements.
Uh, so again, we wanna overall improve the route frequency in South Portland.
A lot of the South Portland routes run, every two hours or so, the, the
crosstown routes, and so those are, those are, routes that we'd like to see
improved frequency as well as improved speed.
Uh, a lot of the feed- feedback that we've received is that people would like to
take the bus, but it takes so much longer to, to ride the bus than it does to,
to, to, to drive or take a r- a rideshare.
Um, hours of operation we've heard is a, is a big, weakness of today's
service. Um, there's one route that only runs on weekends.
A lot of routes end, around nine o'clock at night, if not earlier.
And so we'd really like to kind of, make those hours of operation more
consistent with the rest of our service, which is seven days a week and, you know,
for most days at least running from about 6:00 to, 6:00 AM to 10:00
PM. Uh, Sundays is usually a little bit less service, but, you know,
for the, for Monday through Saturday, that's the level of service we're hoping to
achieve. Uh, maintain, maintain coverage wherever practical, but
also take a hard look at locations where ridership isn't meeting, the
levels that we would expect, because if you can reduce coverage
in areas that don't need, that don't need the service, you can improve the speed
elsewhere. Uh, and then if possible, provide connections to new
places and increase service where we can.
So again, I'll show the Scarborough route in a bit, a bit more detail that,
Glenn had mentioned. Um, the great thing about this route is that it's gonna be
connecting the Route 1 Main Street corridor, so Sunset
Park, Thornton Heights, Cash
Corner, all the way through Legonia and into Portland.
And so this is an area that's relatively, low, has relatively low level of
service today, and those neighborhoods will now see a direct connection into
downtown Portland, rather than having to take a longer route through, Mill
Creek and over the brid- over the Casco Bay Bridge there.
They'll be directly, have a direct connection into downtown Portland, as well
as to Point South, Scarborough Downs, Costco, Market Basket, the
medical campus in Scarborough. So a lot of great service right on this line, and,
our goal is to help facilitate connections to this route so that, you
know, even if you don't live along this corridor, you might be able to transfer to
this kind of corridor pretty quickly.
Uh, this corridor figures to have about 45-minute service to start.
If, things go really well, as we hope it will, we, we could, again, hope to
expand that in the future. Uh, but that's a pretty good level of service compared
to some of the other services in Portland, in South Portland, I should say.
Uh, and so hopefully, we'll see quite a bit of ridership along the entire
route, but especially in South Portland.
And, as a reminder, the more people that board in South Portland, the less
that assessment goes down. So we really wanna encourage, South Portland
residents and visitors to, to take transit.
As Glenn mentioned, we did some public outreach in South Portland and Scarborough
this past fall. Uh, we had an in-person meeting here at the, public
library. Uh, we also had a survey where we had over 300 responses.
About half of those came from people interested in South, riding in South Portland,
so a really good response there. Uh, we also had a virtual meeting.
Um, what we heard from South Portland riders is that,
um-The top priority is frequent service.
Um, longer hours of service, faster travel times on
board. Um, a s- a sliver of people said more direct service, but,
I think generally the, the theme was they wanna be able to get to where they're
going more quickly with less wait time.
Where do people wish they could ride?
Uh, I kinda color-coded this slide so that, the places that we
already serve are in green, the places that we don't serve currently are in orange,
and the places that that new Scarborough route will serve are in blue.
So people mentioned they wanna go to the Maine Mall, they wanna go to the schools.
Well, we already serve those areas, so that must mean that maybe we should improve
service to those areas, because what, what we're offering now isn't working for
those people. Um, we fo- heard folks wanna get to Westbrook
Street, out to the beaches, and Wainwright Field.
We don't serve those areas now, or at least not very well.
Westbrook Street is, we serve the Brick Hill area, but not quite, you know, not
that area near the, closer to the jet port.
Um, and we heard a lot of folks, people, you know, saying they, they wanna get to
r- not just jobs, not just, you know, medical appointments, but they wanna go
to places that kinda make their life full, places that are fun, right?
Uh, sports fields and beaches. So that's totally understandable.
Uh, and then, other n- other locations that we happen to be adding as part of
the Scarborough service, Costco and Sunset Park, so we
can already check those boxes off as soon as we launch that service.
Why don't people ride? Um, it isn't frequent enough, it's a lot too long of a
walking distance to their bus stop, it takes too long, the hours don't work for
them. Uh, some other illustrative
feedback that we received, and I won't read all of these, but, typically things
like, that, you know, they'd like benches and shelters at their stops.
They, they... it takes too long to walk to their, their bus stop.
Um, you know, more direct routes. So, we, we collect a lot of information, and
we try to summarize it as best as possible, but these illustrative comments are
often, they often tell a story that we can't get from, a, a survey,
so.
So getting into the concepts. Uh, so again, I'm, I d- I'm not gonna provide a whole
lot of background of where the, the current service goes,
but one thing we heard a lot, from a lot of folks in, in the public feedback
to date is that the trip to get to and from Southern Maine Community
College just takes too long. Um, for those who are unaware, there's a, a
long, kind of a longer looping service that serves the Meeting House Hill area,
Willard Beach, before you can get to S- to the Maine Community
College. We have a bus route, the Route 2, that runs between the Riverton,
Hannaford, and in some cases out to Westbrook, into Downtown Portland
along Forest Ave, and that sort of just ends in Downtown Portland.
We think it'd be a great opportunity to extend that route into South Portland,
provide a lot of v- desti- destinations for people who live in this area of the
city to get to lots of different places in, Portland, such as W- Woodford's
Corner, Morrell's Corner in Riverton, aside from Downtown
Portland. It also provides the opportunity to make both of those routes better in
terms of the amount of frequency and, and hours that those, services get,
particularly on the weekend. Uh, and so that, that...
we think that'll be a really positive change.
The, the travel time to South, to SMCC will be significantly improved from
this, and we'll see more frequent service as well.
So in addition to a better service to the, east part of, eastern
part of the city, we also wanted to provide a fast connection between the
east and west parts of the city. Uh, currently the Route 24A and Route
24B provide connections between Downtown Portland via Mill Creek to the
Maine Mall, but both routes, they serve a lot of different
places along the way, and as a result, those routes are really slow.
It takes about two hours to make, for those routes to make a full round trip, and
so you can imagine if you're on one of those buses, it's gonna take you a long time
to complete your trip. So if we can get people on, onto this route,
the full round trip might take closer to an hour, which means one-way trip
closer to a half hour. Uh, and so that kinda direct east-west
trip will hopefully not only make those, tho- those travel times
faster, but those, those trips will come more often because the bus isn't taking so
much time traveling through neighborhoods or circulating around the
mall.
And then finally, to provide the coverage that, we currently
provide in South Portland, we have a route that is more or less the, the, the
catch-all, the, the, the neighborhood connector we're calling it.
Um, so this route would consistently, you know...
it's, it's ra- it's, it's, it's, it's more, meandering and less direct
than we typically would like, but this, this route would consistently,
serve most of the city, including Highland Ave, the high
school, the community center, Brick, Red, Red
Bank and Brick Hill, the Maine Mall, and, and the Target area.
Um, I, I mentioned, Brick Hill and the high school.
Those areas are really underserved today, as Glenn mentioned.
Um, there's not a whole lot of, use of transit near the high school and the
community center, which I think is a really big opportunity.
Uh, there's a lot of potential need for transit in those areas.
And the Brick Hill area, those folks, you know, I, I imagine, are really
dependent on transit. The, the transit, the options that are available today are
relatively limited, so if we can improve those options, I think the ridership in
those areas could be significantly increased.
So those are the, the three routes as we see them today.
Um, those, those can more or less be done within our current budget.
We can reallocate the, the, the buses that are out there today and, and more,
and transform them into this, service profile.
Um, we'd have to get into the details to make sure that that's, that's specifically
true, but we also have a couple of ideas for what might, what we might be able to
do if, additional funding was available.
I know that there's transit, there's tax increment finance districts in the
city that we might be able to take advantage of.
So one of the major ideas we had was this mall area
circulator. So one of the weaknesses of our current routes is that they spend a lot
of time around the mall. They're running to Walmart, they're running to Target,
they're running up and down, Westbrook Street.
And, and so about 45 minutes of that two-hour round
trip I mentioned is just the bus
making all these stops around the mall.
And so if we can, make the service more dedicated and provide a
specific route that serves this area, we might be able to serve the area
better, and as well as allow those other routes to, to spend more time getting back
and forth across the city. So this route, if we can fund it-Uh, could
provide service to the Jetport, which South Portland doesn't currently have, as
well as the DHHS office that's right near the Jetport.
Uh, it could provide more consistent service to Red Bank and Brick Hill, as well as
those shopping areas, the mall, Target, and Walmart.
So again, this might be aspirational, but we wanted to provide that,
that, that idea as well.
So an overview of the service, and I, I realize the screen's pretty small, but I
wanted to provide this, just as a
overview. We also have one additional,
kind of, key in our pocket that we might be able to, to use.
So in the green area on the left is a, is a proposed microtransit zone in
Scarborough. So in addition to the fixed route service that Glenn was talking
about, they've also funded the microtransit zone, which is an on-demand
service similar to an Uber or a Lyft service, but it's operated by
Metro with Metro's drivers and vehicles.
And the idea is to make that first and last mile connection.
If, if it's hard for you to walk to the bus stop, this service is for you.
Um, if it's, if the sidewalk connections aren't there, if you're just not able to
make those quarter-mile walks to the bus stop, or if the bus doesn't go where
you need it to go, this might be the way to do it.
And so, as part of this microtransit zone, there might
be an opportunity to expand it into South Portland to cover areas that
even this proposal might not cover as well as, as it should.
So, again, this is very schematic. Could do a lot more work on this.
The great thing about microtransit is it's very nimble, it's very dynamic.
You can make changes to it pretty easily.
And so, again, it's not part of our base proposal here, but it's something that
we have in our pocket for, potential future,
expansion. So I think that's all we have.
We're happy to answer any questions, and, um-
I'm clapping.
Yeah. Thank you.
All right. Did you have something more to say?
Yeah. So the sec- second part of the discussion is, is about the Transit
Advisory Committee, and, it's
not as easy to share on my screen. But, but, as part of the
discussion when we merged Metro, the council at the time had indicated
that they wanted to keep the Transit Advisory Committee going.
It primarily served to help inform our bus service.
Uh, I think in discussions amongst the committee, there is support for,
now dissolving that service given the representation, and feedback we
have, at, on the Metro board, and so that's something
that council's being asked to also provide, guidance
tonight on. And, in addition to any sort of,
feedback you wanna provide to Metro about their proposed, route
restructuring concepts, guidance between balancing
neighborhood coverage and faster, more efficient routes, interest in future
service enhancements that could require additional funding, and also your, your
views on the transit advisory is really what we're looking for.
Well, thank you very much, Scott. I think what I'm recommending for our
process is since we just heard a pretty complex presentation, we open it
up for councilor questions. Then after that, we
can hear public comment on this topic, but we don't have
an open public comment during our workshop meeting.
So the comments tonight will be on the topics on the agenda
only. And then, you would like
some guidance from our council, and then
after that, I think then we talk about the transit committee.
Does that make sense to folks? All right.
So who has questions for our presenters? Councilor Walker.
Hi. Thank you for that presentation. It was really great.
Um, I have three questions. So my first question, I think I have the answer to it
based on, the changes that you're making, but in the slide about
ridership, the Red Bank and Brick Hill areas, would you expect that
ridership would increase with routes that serve on the weekends?
Yes, absolutely. It... And it's been proven improved frequency and span of
service will undoubtedly increase ridership.
And especially, as you can see, that area was overperforming already-
Right
... which means that folks are using the, the limited amount of service there,
so more trips will mean more rides there.
And then this is more of an anecdotal question.
Um, is there Metro service to the Jetport through Portland?
I know there isn't through South Portland, but is there through Portland?
There... Yes, there is through, through Portland.
Okay. Thank you.
Other questions? Councilor West.
You mentioned a new operations and maintenance facility.
Uh, where, where would that be located?
We haven't sited it yet. Um, Metro has, a lease arrangement
with a neighboring property, so there's the possibility of expanding into the
footprint of that neighboring property.
Um, but we're evaluating all options just to make sure that, that whatever
we, whatever the next step is is the most cost-effective one.
Um, so it, it hasn't been finalized.
I suspect that we'll have a site,
I shouldn't say a site, but a plan, here in the
next 60 days. We should be able to determine if it's a stay
plan or if it's a look and assess an additional
site.
Thank you.
Councilor Matthews.
Are we still providing, students free rides?
Yes. Yes, and, I didn't mention it as part of the presentation, but,
we did recently meet with, South Portland High
School, principal and, and, talk
about trying to incentivize more rides through the high school, and, and
that's one of the elements we think that we can roll into the service plans to sort
of, Mike touched on it, improve the frequency and the way that
the trips line up with bell times to be an opportunity to, to support the
high school better.
Thank you.
Other questions? Yeah.
One more question. I'm sorry.
Yes, Mayor.
This is actually a question for Scott.
Um, would that Route 28 with the kind of hopeful,
route, is that something that we could help fund through the Texas
Instruments TIF that we're looking at restructuring?
Right. That's because if, if, if that goes into that,
transit TIF district that we were talking about, we, we can't fund our
current Metro assessment, but there is the possibility to fund future
service expansion from that.
Okay. Thank you.
Counselor Scott
Um, the ridership data, I assume, is riders getting on at
a certain bus stop. Um, I assume you do not have data as
to where they go, where they get off in terms, in terms of full
ride.
Um, not, on an individual basis, no.
But on a broad scale, yes. We have ons and offs.
Okay.
So, we can determine what stops have the most...
This data was all boarding data.
That was all boardings.
Yeah.
We have, we have more history of boardings.
We have better detail on boardings, but we do have, lightings as well.
And does the new,
would the new app payment
allow additional data acquisition?
I mean, respecting privacy, but-
Um, it's, it's really, just a better mechanism for payment.
We already have-
Okay
... a lot of data on, on ridership, both, like as I said,
ons and offs, but not individual account...
Like, we don't know where people are traveling-
Yeah
... but we know in broad strokes, you know, where people are getting on and
off.
Yeah. Thank you.
Any other questions, counselors?
Um, I just have
two, I think. Um, Route 22, Route
23, yay, I wanna cheer so much for those, and the new
Scarborough route, cheering for that one also.
Um, those are coming soon. When is soon,
and how will you work with the city to let people know those exist
now?
Yeah. Thank, thank you for that, because I think I
may have omitted that.
It's an easy aside.
Really, you know, it's probably the most important thing that we get from this,
this workshop, is y- our service, the service changes that we
talked about, the soonest w- would be implemented would be next year.
We would need to have a better understanding of whether...
And so our, our budget process is a calendar year, so,
we would want to come back to the council, ideally maybe in
August, or early September, to get
a, a blessing if there was to be service changes, 'cause that is still our
agreement, from the merger. Um, so we need to
know if we should be putting together an-
Okay
... aspirational ask, or if we should put together something that's more cost
neutral. As Mike said, we can do both.
Uh, we can do a cost neutral proposal.
The frequency will not be as good, of course, with a co- with a cost neutral
proposal. Um, but we can still make those improvements in directness and, and some
of the other ones. And then, of course, we'll need to have a better understanding
if the TIF, service in, in, the Maine Mall area
can be funded, if we should, come with that proposal as well.
So the soonest those would roll out would be next year.
Uh, the Scarborough service, would be this summer.
Okay. Thank you very much. And as I look further at the, what
guidance we're being asked to give, I think that what you've just said is what I
actually should've known about already.
That's okay.
But I was getting so excited seeing those new routes.
Um, and I just had one more question.
What can we do to increase benches and shelters at the
stops?
So, you know, I, I think, the best thing you can do is
make, bus stop sites, part of your design review process
for, developments. So, we have
kind of a mixed, we have mixed success with that.
Uh, we- we've had pretty good luck lately in Portland with, with getting them to
include that as a stipulation for some, some developments.
Um, so if that can be done, that's helpful.
And then on municipal projects, if those come along, and we've already
been, you know, working closely with, staff on this.
I know, you know, we were able to complete the, the Western Ave one, in
coordination with, with South Portland staff.
So I think as municipal projects come along, we'd like to know about that, because
if there's sidewalk work being done, sometimes there's an opportunity for
us to leverage that and say, "Okay, well, you already have the contractor.
We have the, the shelter. Let's see if, you know, if they can just put a pad in, we
can supply the shelter." So we try and, you know,
take advantage of that when we can.
Okay. Thank you very much. Um, and this
isn't a question, but it is a comment, which is, you know, what was it?
About a year ago, a year and a half ago, something, time runs
together, we all had to kind of collaborate and
trust and look at some feelings about potential
loss of the South Portland bus system, and it has
come together. Our drivers are still with you.
It's good to hear all of this reporting.
So I just wanna mark this moment.
Th- thank you for that. We're, we're very happy with the way it's come together as
well.
Thank you. Um, I think we can open for public comment on the topic
of our bus transit system.
Anyone? Come on. Don't make me use this gavel.
Glenn, do you mind un-
Of course.
Uh, Rosemary DeAngelis, Pleasantdale.
Uh, I promised Metro I would give my testimonial.
So I do love Metro. I think it's a
huge, additive in our city, and really pleased that we
have it, and pleased that we went ahead with the merger.
I will s- say that,
so I wanted to go back to the resolution that we had to,
have high school riders, high school students ride for free,
and Counselor, Matthews stole my thunder.
But, the Bike Ped Committee did pass that initiative to the
council, who supported it, and there was some confusion in the
transition. But we had a meeting at the high school with
the, with Sarah Glenn, the principal, and with Mike Tremblay, who's
a very fast talker, by the way. Um,
and Glenn Fenton, and we were joined by board member Steve
Riley. And the issue, they were fully open to
understanding where the confusion came and how we were going to resolve it,
so our students are now, once again, all riding,
with just the use of their s- of their high school
pass. Um,
and I really appreciated hearing tonight that there was going to be increase
near the community center and on Evans Street, because that's one of the challenges
we have with students who leave late and have to
get the bus. And right now, most often, that bus is
coming a- at a very slow pace, so they h- they make
their way down to Amato's, which is still really good, and,
so that they can get a bus ride home.
Um, s- and I wanna say that we had a brief discussion
that day about, potentially looking
at, now I'm putting on my school board hat,
w- we talked about having high school, the high school
students potentially ride Metro for their, for
their bus ride. And of course, there would be a cost implication to that,
but, th- that will be a conversation that will happen
between Metro and Mike Nally, our facilities director.
Um, but I'm excited to hear about that, and to look at that,
and to think about ways that I said we can
make riding a bus not geeky. You know?
That it's kind of like a cool thing to do.
So one of the ways to do that is to start with, with people
in their teens, where they don't have to feel like they have to have a car to
go everywhere, but that they can actually ride a bus.
So, thrilled, excited, and thank you a- all so
much. Thank you both.
Thank you very much. Other public comments about the
transportation?
All right. Well, I think
we'll call public comment closed on that.
And now the council gets to discuss some questions we've been
asked about.
Um, do you wanna take the questions in order?
Y- you can combine them into one statement.
I don't know if it has to be check, check, check, 'cause some of them overlap, but,
I think-
One, some-
... mostly for Glenn, to, to hear, you know,
what, especially f- for later this summer, do you wanna come back with a, a
larger cost proposal that enhances services, or is it
more redistributing what we currently have to make routes efficient, but not as
much, frequency?
All right. Do we have a councilor who'd like to react to these questions?
Well, we have Councilor Walker. Thank you.
Sure. Um, I'm in full support of this.
I think that it's great wherever we can improve access, that gets people out of
their cars or makes it easier for pedestrians to get across the city from
A to B, is, is great. I love the connections to
Scarborough. I think that's a great idea.
Um, I love the idea of it being more efficient.
That's been the main... I, I work right by the mall, and I've
never been able to take the bus to work because it's just not, it's
not feasible from a time perspective, so I love the idea of making it faster,
which is, I think, gonna make it easier for people.
And I love that you'll be reestablishing service to
the Red Bank and Brick Hill areas on the weekend.
Um, I'd be very interested in seeing future enhancements, both from a cost
neutral perspective, but also what potential, especially if we're thinking
about TIFs, what potentially that could look like.
Thank you very much. Would someone like to go next?
Councilor Matthews.
Well, admittedly, I was probably the biggest critic of the
merger. Uh,
so, I guess I'm eating pie. Uh, so-
Pie is good.
Yeah. Well, I had to say pie. I couldn't say the other thing that sticks in my
throat. So,
anyway, I'm impressed with, how well it's
going. Um,
I really, appreciate the presentation tonight, and I do support,
everything that you have moving forward.
Um, again, I just, I'm, I'm glad to
see that, we're, you're still able to provide support with good service.
And, you know, there's always gonna be critics of, you
know, certain routes and time and not being
able to get certain places, and it's completely understandable.
Some of these places that you put up there would be
kind of, problematic actually, I think, to
actually make that happen. So I'll be optimistic, but,
I do, I do definitely support the,
plan.
Thank you very much. Do we have another councilor?
Councilor Scott.
Um, just wanna add my support to all the work that, went
on here. Thank you for the data and the presentation.
Um, and I will say, I am the proud mom of two boys who
actually love taking the bus, and one is a high school student who
takes it almost every day. Uh, so appreciate that.
Um, I think one area of guidance that
I... It's a little bit of a question and hopefully some guidance, is
that
when we talk about things being revenue neutral
or requiring additional city funding,
I anticipate that there are many aspects of
bus service and public transportation that may
require some additional funding,
but are not necessarily revenue neutral in that
they sort of save the city and save
taxpayers other money. Like, that's the entire point of public
transportation. So I think as we think about our city funding and
some of the challenges that we have in front of us, figuring out
a way to tell the story of a
comprehensive
public transportation benefits that are beyond
just this is a little bit of an increase in...
I, I know I'm preaching to the choir, but,
you know, this may be additional city funding at this point, but here is how it
saves taxpayer money, business money, all of those
things, and thinking about ways to, benefit the
city
that is not necessarily revenue neutral or cost based, but,
building on the sort of externalities of the benefits of public
transportation would be...Hugely helpful for this council and for me in
terms of promoting-
Mm-hmm
... enhancements to our public transportation system, which I am a huge
advocate of, have used, promote. My favorite mug
actually is a South Berlin Transit Authority mug that we got at a like touch the
bus or something event. Um, I know that doesn't exist anymore, but it's
still in circulation. So anyway, that's my comment.
Go forth and conquer.
Love the mug.
Um-
Should've brought it.
Okay, another councilor like to
say anything?
Well.
I'm, I'm looking at Councilors Pride and West. Councilor West?
I'll just say I have nothing to add.
I agree-
Okay
... with the points, the points that have been made by my fellow councilors.
Councilor Pride?
That makes it easy for me to just say ditto.
Okay. We have very succinct councilors today.
Councilor Coleman?
Fully support, nothing to add, and I really do
like, Council Carter's question
about if you can give us points so that we can make that this
really is, it's a cost, but the benefit in the long run,
that would, that would be most helpful to all of us.
Thank you very much. Um, well, since Scott has taken the trouble
to draft four questions, I'll quickly answer them.
That was the assignment, right? Um, supporting the goal of more
frequent and direct, yes, yes, yes.
Um, yes. Initial reactions to the
draft route restructuring comments.
It was very interesting to hear what you've heard and what we need to
do, and I think all of those sound like great ideas, and
it's exciting to think that there would be a bus that goes east to west and
back again. Um, thank you very much for that one, for all
of them.
Guidance on the balance between neighborhood coverage and faster, that I think I
already spoke to that, and service enhancements, I guess you already heard me
reveal that I do have some concerns sometimes that we don't have enough
accessible shelters with benches in them when people are
waiting. And so, your answer to me was how we get more was to
require that when there's new development, that that puts...
But, you know, there's plenty of bus stops right now that there is
no new development, and they still would benefit, I think, from benches and
shelters. So I think that's a goal to keep in
mind. All right. Um,
our fifth item was w- does the City Council wish to dissolve the
Transit Advisory Committee? And I think we need
to... Well, do we need to speak to that
individually, or do we need a show of hands?
Does anyone have questions about that idea?
Yes, Councilor Scott?
Oh, I don't have a question. I had a comment, so I'll wait in the comments.
Oh, well, a comment is fine, too.
I, would approve of the dissolving of the Transit Advisory
Committee, as I'm generally in favor of making our city work
most efficient, and I think that we have proven that Metro is working well and
does not need that committee. I also just wanted to say having the five
questions on a slide is exceptionally helpful, so I appreciate
that.
Good to hear. All right, Councilor Pride?
Um, I just wanna thank the committee members for the hard work that they've done
over the years. Um, it, it certainly was an important
committee. Um-
Yes
... and so I, I appreciate their willingness to
disband. Um, if they weren't willing to disband, I'd give them a hearing
out, 'cause I know that I, I appreciate public
participation. Um, but since they are willing to disband,
then, I, I, I support that.
Thank you very much. Anyone else? Um,
yes?
I mean, I was, I was going to ask for a show of hands if we're going to, do
that. But if you... Are you wanting to make a comment?
I'm, I'm fine.
Oh, you... Don't feel shut down.
No.
That was the last thing.
I was just gonna say, as the councilor serving on the Transit, Authority or
Advisory Committee, I, I also wanted to echo, Councilor Pride's
comments-
Yes
... that thank the members for their service, and also for their flexibility,
because it's been a year of, of fluctuation.
Um, and they've been very willing to kind of ride, no pun intended, ride it out
with us. Um, and so I just wanted to say thank you, and I also agree with the
idea of disbanding it.
And Councilor Coleman?
And mine was we still have the, is it two members on
the board from South Portland, the Metro Board?
That-
Yes.
Okay.
South Portland is well-represented on the Metro Board right now, so.
I think it's three, right?
Yeah, I think it is.
Three or four. Yeah.
Four.
Four?
Even better.
About four.
Thank you.
Wow .
Ah. We're a block.
Okay.
Yeah,
Councilors, do you wish to dissolve the Transit Advisory Committee?
All in favor?
Point of order.
Yes. Oh.
There's no voting during
I know it's not. It, it won't be counted as a real vote.
All right. I just-
I just wanted to do a sort of official show of hands.
Straw poll.
But isn't an official show of hands a vote? It's okay. It's fine.
No, not real-
Yes, it is.
I think it's the, it's-
Yeah.
Well, I think it's-
The same way I see... Can councilors just indicate if they're in favor if they
Yes. I mean, h- I mean, you could do it by like giving a subtle wink if
you want and not be counted as a vote.
Just down here works.
But I, I thought maybe we could do it that way. All right.
Rosemary says no.
Um-
You can also ask the city manager if he has enough, 'cause I think he does
... maybe it's me saying all in favor that makes it a, seem like a definitely a
vote. So I think maybe we'll just kind of... All right.
Thank you, Parliamentarian. Um, all right.
Well, I think we've established the will of council on that one, so let's move on
to temporary emergency rental assistance. Thank you again.
Mr. City Manager, would you like to kick us off on this one?
Sure thing.
Thank you so much.
Good night, all.
It's cold. It's
very cold
I thought the font was bigger. Apologies if you, for
folks that it'll be bigger than this.
Um, so everyone recalls January, there was a surge in federal,
immigration enforcement presence in, in Maine, and there was a
resulting economic disruption for some households, either, folks,
not feeling they could leave their house, go to work, or businesses that closed
because workers weren't showing up, or, whatever reason.
So the mayor had asked for, based on some public feedback, that
we received and checking with some councilors that, we have a
potential... We have a workshop on potential rental
assistance, for, households that are
impacted. And so the goal was to prevent housing instability and
evictions that may occur, without such assistance.
So the key questions ultimately for the council, and I, I will display these at
the end too, is should the city provide financial assistance to
residents experiencing economic disruption?
And if the answer is yes, how should that assistance be delivered?
So we'll talk about whether it's run through the city or if it's via a
donation to a nonprofit to administer.
Uh, and then of course, what should the total funding amount be?
Um, and if it's city administered, should the council adopt the staff
proposed program structure? We took a little time working with our social
services director to, to, outline what a program would look like
if, city run.
So option one for funding to a nonprofit, the city would allocate
funds, to a nonprofit organization that would administer the
rental assistance. We can attach some conditions to it.
For example, only assisting South Portland households.
Uh, the nonprofit would then be responsible for taking in the
applications, determining whether someone's eligible, and then they would
distribute funds, to landlords or applicants.
You could require it that it's, given to landlords and not
applicants, if that's, a concern, which understandably it could
be. Uh, there's a couple potential partners that I've identified here for
you, Project HOME, which is run by the Quality Housing Coalition and the
Cumberland County Homeless Prevention Program run through Opportunity Alliance.
So those are two examples of, of, entities the city
could partner with or provide that funding to.
The pros and cons there, the pros are that nonprofits already have an established
relationship and trust in impacted communities.
Um, they're, they're in some cases already doing this work.
It reduces administrative workload that would fall on city staff if we were to
administer it. And nonprofits may provide additional outreach to
residents in need that we frankly, might not be able to.
The cons, of course, is there's less direct oversight by the city, although we're
sending money, for this purpose, perhaps with some
strings. Um, you know, we're not, deciding cases on an
individual basis. There may be potential administrative fees, but I'm not
aware that the two, groups that I mentioned would charge those.
Um, and there may be some desire for the city to still
monitor reporting and compliance if there are kind of, conditions
or, or strings attached to those dollars.
The second option would be a city administered program.
It would be, ultimately administered through our social services general
assistant department. Uh, the process would be very similar.
Applicants submit documentation of income disruption, which we
can talk about in a little bit. Um, if we verify that there's housing
instability, then we would provide assistance and pay it directly to, as we've
proposed it, landlords.
Uh, some of the requirements, and again, these are things that we've come up with,
and if you do choose to have this be city administered, if this is something you
wanna do, we'd want you to weigh in on some of these things.
But certainly you have to be a resident of South Portland and occupy a rental unit
within the city. You need to demonstrate that you have responsibility for
paying rent, so you're not someone that's sleeping on the couch and not responsible
for the rent. You're the actual person that, is responsible on the
lease. Uh, you demonstrate that you had an income loss or employment
disruption between January 15th, which was, a
little bit before the surge happened, but rumors were certainly swirling, and then
March 1st, that covers a nice long timeframe, that could be
associated with economic disruption related to federal enforcement
activity. Uh, demonstrate housing instability, such as your
rent is in arrears, you've received late notices or an ev- or at eviction
risk. Um, we would recommend the person first apply for general
assistance or seek other sources of funding.
We've actually had several folks inquire about possible
assistance, and we've run them either through GA or, we've referred them
to other agencies, and they've been able to find, the resources
that they've needed. Uh, and so if those have been exhausted, this would
almost be like a program of, of last resort.
Uh, we propose limiting it to two months of assistance, a maximum of three thousand
per household, and, and again, paid directly to the
landlord. Uh, we would accept applications until June
1st or when funds are exhausted, whichever comes first.
Any sort of funds that were unused would come back to the source.
So for example, if you pulled this from your fund balance, it would go back to
fund balance. Uh, and then also importantly, we would not require the
disclosure of immigration status, as part of any
application, nor would we voluntarily share any of this program
information or applications or otherwise with federal enforcement
authorities unless we, of course, required to by law or some sort of court
order or warrant. Pros and cons here, there's very
strong oversight and accountability of municipal funds.
Um, the assistance is clearly targeted towards,
this situation and housing stabilization, and there's consistent
eligibility standards and verification procedures that we would have in
place. The cons, again, requires administrative capacity
from our existing city staff. There's no new staff that would be,
accepting and reviewing, this and, and cutting the checks to
landlords. Um, application processing time would be
required, and, some residents frankly may be
hesitant to apply directly through a municipal program,
given that we're a public,
entity.So moving on from that,
funding considerations. Uh, according to Project HOME, their average assistance is
approximately $2,100 per household.
That's an updated number, I got today from Victoria Morales.
So if the council decided to move forward, and you're looking for a
funding amount recommendation, we would suggest, up to
$150,000 from undesignated fund balance.
This would reduce our capacity for future CIP items, so if
this money is used for this purpose, we're e- there's either gonna be a, a
CIP item or items that we don't fund or we'd have to use property taxes
to fund. Um, but that's, it's up to the council to choose the, the
priorities. Um, we should obviously restrict it to p- South
Portland households, and based on the numbers from Project HOME, we'd be able to
assist about 71, households with that amount of money.
So our recommendation. If this is something that you wish to do, we do
recommend providing funding to one or more of the nonprofits.
Uh, we think Project HOME, where they're already doing this work, seems to be best
suited, for this type of,
funding. Um, there's the question of is it just a lump sum that we give to
them, or is it kind of on a reimbursement basis where they provide to us
assistance that they've given to South Portland households and we
reimburse accordingly? Um, if you wanna get into that level of specifil-
specificity, you certainly can. Um, and so ultimately,
here are your questions again. Are we providing assistance?
And if yes, city, nonprofit, funding amount,
source, and any additional program requirements, restrictions or,
es- or if it's a city-run, do you agree with, what we've come up with?
So, Chris, did you wanna share anything?
This would be really your office, we, we, administering this,
um...
Just, obviously we're ready to kinda just do what we need
to do. So if this is something that, we decide to go with, then we can, you
know, we could do that. Um, that said,
haven't, you know... There was definitely an uptick of folks reaching out as a
result of this situation, but, we weren't by any means inundated
by, like, a large sum. So,
I'm gonna keep quiet I guess.
Okay, thanks Chris.
Ladies and gentlemen, Chris Pupke, the head of GA.
Oh, thank you.
Whoops. Thanks for-
Thank you. Thank you, Chris
... giving a part of my chair.
Okay, so you're finished. Chris is finished.
All right, councilors,
questions, and
I think, we could ha- potentially have a lot of questions.
Um, anyone wanna roll off as our
starter? All right, Councilor Scott. Thank you.
I think I have two main questions. One,
I guess, Scott, I wanted to clarify your thoughts.
I think from
one of your slides, the recommendation was to go with a
nonprofit versus city staff, and I wanted to clarify that
that was correct and that you feel that this would be
not a huge burden, but obviously a, an
additional
request on the city, and that your recommendation would be to go through a
nonprofit.
I mean, I, ye- yeah, I th- I think there can be enough sa- in my, in my discussions
with, um... I mean, I only really had an extensive conversation with,
Project HOME staff. But based on the screening process they go through, the
fact that we could restrict it to South Portland residents,
and that they do, as I said, some
vetting, I, I think they could handle it.
And, and so if they, if they're already doing it and they can handle it, I don't
know if we need to reinvent the wheel.
As, as Chris said, this isn't gonna break his department if it, if it is
handled, in-house. But, I think there's some benefits to
a, an agency that's already established and has connections in some of these
communities that, folks maybe feel better reaching out to
them. That said, if council wants to run it through us, we, we can do it.
We've set up the parameters to do it, but, but we would recommend, going
with a nonprofit.
Okay, and sorry, my question list is sort of growing.
There is, I mean, obviously still the opportunity of going through general
assistance in South Portland-
Yep
... and obviously-
Of course
... seeking out other services.
Yeah.
And I know GA is very good at connecting,
folks with resources.
The, the problem with GA sometimes, and Chris, correct me if I get it wrong, but if
someone is employed and they missed a brief period, they may not qualify for GA
because they do have that job and that income.
So,
Chris is gonna correct me.
Chris Pupke, director of social services, general assistance.
Thank you.
Um, that was absolutely correct, yes.
Hey.
You've, uh... The thing with GA is that,
we were instructed by the state when determining eligibility for this specifically
that, missing work and therefore violating the general
assistance work requirements, specifically out of fear of encountering
immigration enforcement, was not to be considered just cause on its own.
There might be other issues related to that, that we could then kinda say, "Well,
this is just cause," but for the most part, right.
So you might not be eligible for GA, if you apply for just GA.
But you can-
And that's, that's state-mandated?
Mm, yes.
Does the city have the ability to-
No.
No. Okay.
I gotta stop.
Thank you.
No.
Um, the other question was do we have some data, either from Project HOME,
Opportunity Alliance, as to
sort of the... I'm just trying to assess the need and thinking about that in
terms of the funding allocation, if we have a sense
of data from number of households that are
in this situation,
financial sort of volume here.
So I'm, I'm playing on my phone. I was, looking.
I got an email today from Project HOME folks.
So since January 23rd, and this is
region-wide, there have been 807 contacts, to
the Project HOME's Emergency Housing Fund,
and there have been many more informal in- or incomplete, inquiries.
Um, out of those contacts, 470 had confirmed addresses, and 80 of
them were from South Portland. Um,
uh-It looks like it, I didn't have a number, but for according
to, Victoria Morales, to assist all South Portland households
currently on their list, the total cost would be
$168,000. I didn't get clarity on whether that's,
including ones they've already assisted or ones that are still to be assisted,
but, I- I guess they're s- they're seeing,
demand.
Yeah. No, that, that's very helpful. Thank you.
I think that's all for now.
It sounded like, and I also questioned her earlier
today, that it's 80 times 2,000 a-
about, and that's where they get to once ag- and so those are the 80 not yet
served-
Yes
... from South Portland.
Got it. Scott, can you just clarify, is that 80, families affected by
ICE?
Um, so I don't know if that, they all were.
They w- I think she indicated in her message that many of them indicate that that's
what it was, but, I, I, I, I don't know if it means all of them
were.
All right, thanks.
Yeah, I'd like-
Um,
I think I might have an answer. Is that okay?
I do too.
Yeah.
That when, that she said that the pur- that
for these purposes of emergency rental
assistance, they have the fund that they have designed
to help households exclusively, this money, even
though they in the past have provided eviction rental
assistance, but specifically for the numbers she's giving,
Scott, it's families that have lost income because of immigration
enforcement actions or fear of detention, if that's
helpful. So... All right, other questions?
Councilor West.
So immigration enforcement actions or fear of
detention.
Mm.
So I just to try to-
Yeah
... keep this as fact-based as possible, and maybe the chief is the best person to
answer. I just would like to s- get straight, how long did the
surge last, and how many people were apprehended by
ICE in South Portland?
Police Chief Danaher.
He's always, he's always-
Doing good. Thank you, Mr. Manager. Police Chief Danaher.
Your two-part question. So my contact
gave me a number of 220 overall arrests
over a four-day period. The-
Statewide.
I'm sorry?
Statewide, right?
Statewide. Uh, when I asked to be, for specific numbers of
South Portland, I was not given an answer, and that was the last
information I have with this contact.
Uh, if I had to guess, based on the, calls for
service that we had, I would say less than five. But again, that's a guess.
In South Portland.
And, and the duration?
Four-day duration. They were only here for four days.
Thank you.
More, more questions?
Councilor Scott. I just had one more clarification.
I think, Scott, you mentioned that if we were to,
provide a donation to Project HOME, there is the
ability to provide sort of a city
allocation, but not necessarily fund
that, that we could sort of reimburse on a needs basis
from them.
I think-
If, if you wanna set it up that way, where, you know, they, they kinda send us a
list every week or month saying, "Hey, here's the families that we assisted in
South Portland, and here was the cost," y- y-
we, we could, we could do it that way, or you could do it where, "Here's
150, you've got until June 1st," or, or if you don't wanna put any
restriction on it, but you've got until a certain amount of time, to, to spend
this on South Portland families, just report back to us with the, with the data.
But that, you could do it either way.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Any other councilors questions?
I have one. Um, I hadn't expected to ask this question,
but you did mention that the 150,000, we're just
using that as the ballpark, could have an
impact on future CIP requests. So to put that in
context, Scott, and again, not trying to put you on the spot, but
ballpark, when you bring that budget forward in-
Yeah
... for FY27, are we gonna see CIP
as, you know, 300,000, which I think that's pretty
low, and 150 would be significant-
Yeah, right
... or are we gonna see, like, 2.5 million?
I just-
Yep
... I'm looking for a little context.
Good, good context. So, so this is the amount.
So we fund CIP from numerous sources.
Some of it comes from grants, some of it comes from, TIF
reserves, some of it comes from, other reserves that
we've built up, you know, like, for our fire truck, we try to save up for that
before we buy a new one, so there's reserves like that.
So the amount that actually comes from undesignated fund balance,
you know, so every year, historically has been around
1 to 1.2 million. Um, in the past couple years,
we've actually had a, on the city side, we've actually had a pretty
decent, return on our fund balance.
So this year, for example, we're gonna spend about 3
million, from undesignated fund balance on our CIP items.
Now, this does not fund all the requests.
There's a lot of things, that departments are not
getting that, that, you know, they, that if we had more money,
they would. But th- this wouldn't impact anything in this year's budget.
It just would mean ne- next year there's a pool of money that, would
carry over, and it would be $150,000 less.
So, so in that context-
Okay
... next year we might spend 2.85 million.
Okay. That is helpful, at least to me.
I thank you for it. And now I think we can open public comment
on this topic. Public comment on this topic alone is open.
Thank you.
And please say your name. You can say the street you live on.
And watch your three-minute timer.
If it works.
All right.
Good evening. My name is Margot Kralik, and this is my
mom, Emily Hansen. We live on Hillside
Avenue.We are so pleased you are discussing rent
relief at today's workshop. As you know,
many South Portland residents are still struggling
financially from the ICE operation in January, and
some have asked us to share their experiences with you
tonight.
One resident wrote, "While being held by ICE at a jail in
Maine, I was kept in a freezing room with dozens of other
people. I fell because the shoes provided were too
big, causing an injury that was ignored by staff.
I lost weight because the food was barely edible, and guards
used abusive language towards us daily.
I felt that because I was an immigrant, I was treated as if I had no human
rights. I lost my job, I can't pay
rent, and the landlord sent a letter of quit to my
family. An organization helped my family, but they
couldn't pay it all. My credit score is affected.
Please, South Portland, help us."
Another resident writes, "I am a parent in South
Portland, and I was terrified to send my children to
school. Following the Catch of the Day operation, my children's
school was on lockdown. A neighbor told me they saw ICE agents near
the elementary dri- school driveway.
My kids were too scared to go to class, and I have lost work
because, because I could not leave them alone.
I kept receiving bills and emails from my landlord to pay
rent, but I was not working and I had no idea what to
do. They sent me a quit letter."
Another woman writes,
"My husband was detained by ICE while on his way to work.
He is our primary earner. Now, not only am I left
alone to care for our children, but I had to use the money I had
saved for our rent to pay for a lawyer to help him.
I don't know how I will keep our apartment for the rest of the
month." These stories from individuals
are heartbreaking, and we know that evictions have ripple effects
throughout our communities. They are disrupting to children's
education, cause instability in the workfor-
force, and increase municipal costs.
South Portland residents have been working hard trying to
connect families with rent support through community
organizations, general assistance, and local
fundraising. It has not gone far enough.
We need your help. Let's continue to work together by
funding a much-needed rent relief program.
Thank you very much to both of you.
Do we have anyone else who'd like to make public comment on this
topic?
It's a hard act to follow. Um,
I'm Chelsea Bian. I live on Margaret Street.
And, first, just thank you for taking up this issue and
considering these options this evening.
Um,
I, will be quick. I, I guess two
things. One, I think either of these options
are, are good ones. Um, and I think the
most essential thing here is to
do-- to create a program that will do what we need it
to do, which is to get money to people who need it as
quickly and fairly as possible. And,
I do think that speed is a factor here.
Obviously, when an eviction is started, costs
are compounded pretty quickly, and so creating a system that will get
money to people who need it, efficiently is key.
I, wrote the letter that was submitted to you with a hundred and forty
signatures from residents, last week, and that letter laid out
a GA or a city-administered option.
However, I, I was just speaking for myself, not the other hundred and
thirty-nine. Um, I do think, using Project HOME is a
great option. They are an, organization that is
already set up to do this, and, I, I like
that they're able to do a South Portland specific
fund. Um, and,
and
I think there is-- I do have one concern with
the, the, plan laid out
in, for a city-administered fund, which is the sense of
requiring people to offer sort of proof of fear,
a proof of a loss of income or loss of time at
work. I, I very much understand the wa- the, the desire
to kind of, introduce some accountability to the, this program.
I also know of families who, for example, the mother
continued to work and the father, had to delay
his own job search because of the surge, and
so that is a hard thing to prove, how y- how that family is
affected. And just think if we wanna-- we want the
barriers to be low, while still being
responsible, it seems like Project HOME is set up to do
that. Um, and also, I appreciate the
chief's, statistics or, you know, his summary of the
surge. I do-- I, I realize it was a
four-day official event.
However, a- as we know-
Thirty seconds
... specifically from, you know, the, the school departments, the fear went on
much longer than that. And in fact, ICE operations are
ongoing in our state, that there's news all the time of, of,
people being arrested. And so that fear is continuing, and we need to
take account for that. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else like to make a comment?
Thank you.
Good evening.
I'm Reverend Alison Buttrick Patton.
I'm the senior minister at First Congregational Church, United Church of Christ at
301 Cottage Road. Um, and I'm joined this
evening by the interim director of
our community crisis ministry, which is a project of First
Congregational Church, Kathy Cotter, and one of the committee
members for that same project, Scott
Berry. Um, we work
routinely to respond to emergency needs of our
neighbors in South Portland and in Cape Elizabeth, providing
rent relief, and, and other kinds of assistance
as, people are referred to us by
GA. And, so I want to stand just
to, affirm what's already been lifted up that this is an important and
timely proposal, and also appreciate the
work that GA does in an ongoing way.
Uh, we've very much been grateful for not just how
they've referred folks to us, but also the feedback we get about the experience
that folks have when they go to GA. Uh, and also
want to affirm that there are folks currently who may feel more
comfortable going to a nonprofit organization that is already
set up to be working with immigrants and has,
has those processes built in. So,
gratitude for and faith in the work of GA, and
also want to support, the
city's recommendation that this go
forward in whatever way you discern might be best,
but certainly affirm the, the idea that, that sending this to a
nonprofit that's already doing this work makes a great deal of sense.
Um, thank you so much for taking this up.
We feel, the dismay of our neighbors on a
weekly basis, as I know many of you do, and I am
grateful that you're taking time to consider this
intervention.
Thank you very much. Do we have additional public comment on this
topic? Anyone? Please don't be
shy.
Uh, Rosemary DeAngelis, Pleasantdale.
Uh, I, I think that going through a nonprofit
makes perfect sense. I think that, having this
be an additional, responsibility on
our general assistance staff, even though they're certainly sound like they're
willing to do that, being able to vet the co- the,
the applications and go through all of that that is already set up through
Project HOME,
I think, it makes sense to just continue
to do that. I've had, at least three
friends who were, as we say, kidnapped during
this surge, and
so they-- And I would agree with the previous speakers.
You know, this has continued to have impact.
Um, I would also say that there have been
other organizations, people, private citizens who have made
donations. There have been-- There's been an effort to
assist many residents along the way.
And
I also just wanted to say, as a member of the school board, I was kept
abreast of all ICE activities near our schools, and the-- and I
can safely say we did not have any ICE activities in any of our
schools. So I just want that to be publicly
stated, because I don't want people to leave here thinking that there were
children taken from bus stops or, or
anywhere. Like, that did not happen in South Portland.
Um, I... And the last thing I would
say is I would support... I
mean, this is a, this is a time of financial
crisis for everybody. And so I would support making a
donation of, for example, fifty thousand dollars, and then
getting documentation from Project HOME of the spend
down of that to South Portland families, and then let the council decide
if it wants to make an additional donation beyond that.
But I think we have to make a good faith effort and do that, and
I encourage that and support that.
And at the same time, as I'm trying to deal with
the present school budget, I'm very
sensitive to what the responsibilities
and,
and, yeah, just what the financial responsibilities are on
everyone right now. And so I think that we have to be
cautious with our own spending and that you are
spending taxpayers' money. So-
Thirty seconds.
Um, I just encourage you to make a flat donation, get
documentation of the expenditure of it, and then make a decision about
whether you want to add more. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Anyone else? If you have a
public comment to make, please come to the microphone. Thank you.
Um,
hang on for one second.
You good?
Yeah.
Okay. Um, Alex Redfield. I live on Cooper Street.
I'm gonna talk really fast and fit this into three minutes.
I really appreciate seeing all of our elected representatives return to an
important topic, and I'm starting with authentic and sincere gratitude for
your continued attention and interest in exploring what rental assistance might
mean for our community members. It's clear there's a lot of work and thought and
prudence being applied by you all, making tough decisions about buses, which I
also care about. Uh,
and that's really heartening to see, so thank you for that.
I'm gonna use my time to share a few completely unscientific extensions of
math based on what somebody who got a C+ in pre-calculus can do with
thirty minutes of playing around with the Census Bureau and Google Scholar.
I'm sharing these to give you a different perspective on the scope of what happened
in January. I hope you have better math than this, but I'm happy to share my
sources. Twenty percent of South Portland's population is non-white.
That's roughly fifty-five hundred people.
Certainly not all non-white people felt the brunt of the fear caused by enhanced
enforcement operations. Not all of them are renters.
Not all those people lost income. But because there isn't any oversight or,
accountability, I'm gonna use that number for our discussion
today.More than ninety-five percent of non-white people in Maine are foreign-born
or first-generation immigrants.
People part of that demographic are more likely to start and run businesses.
People in that demographic are more likely to hire new employees in their
communities. In a time where across the northeast, populations are getting older,
folks new to Maine are disproportion- disproportionately younger and of working age
right at a time where our community is wrestling with the impacts of long-term
trends of aging populations, meaning fewer school-age families, meaning deceased
enrollment in-- decreased enrollment in schools.
So, in January, a super valuable part of our community, even if we're just looking
at the tiniest, least complete, least important assessment of what this contri-
community contributes, that community experienced an income disruption.
Quick detour to put two hundred and fifty arrests statewide into context.
Two hundred and fifty arrests out of fifty-three thousand immigrants in Maine means
half of one percent. Seems low. Let's talk about COVID.
Eighteen hundred deaths in Maine.
That's three hundred and seventy-eight percent higher the-- of a rate,
and we were really afraid. We were all afraid.
We disrupted every part of our society to protect even though only
eighteen hundred people died. That's a weird thing to say.
I don't feel good about that. I take it back. Whatever.
Um, renters who experience an income disruption are three times more likely to
miss a housing payment, three times more likely to miss a utility payment, fourteen
times more likely to be evicted. One in ten people who need rental assistance
actually receive it, and across the board, people who are evicted leave their
communities, moving to less safe and stable housing.
The cost of that displacement is often borne by municipal governments.
A long-term study by the Urban Institute quantified the cost of unpaid property
tax bills-
Thirty seconds
... utility bills, excess drain on social services and municipal programs in
Miami, calculated that to be between thirteen and thirty-one million dollars
annually. That's four-tenths, between four-tenths and nine-tenths of a percent of
their annual budget. Extrapolate that to South Portland's budget, we're talking
nine hundred thousand dollars a year in costs.
That's social services, school department costs, not even talking about
shelters or emergency response. So, Counselor Scott's
comment, there's so much more than dollars and dollars out here.
My gumshoe detective work includes an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
Time.
Mitigating the long-term cost of evictions is an immediate, medium term, and
long-term investment that makes sense. I hope you make it. Thank you.
Thank you for your comment and your, and your math, I
think. Um, anyone else-
Yes
... want to make a comment?
Did-- Chris, did you have some information-
Yeah. That is-
... to add?
Uh, I just wanted to thank, Crisis Ministries, for, since they're joining
us here tonight. Um, when I say that when some folks might not be eligible for GA
and we have to refer out, they're always our first kind of tool in the
toolbox. So I do appreciate, they came here tonight.
I appreciate all their help, not just for this top- like this issue, but really
throughout the year. So just wanted to add that. Thanks.
Good to hear.
Great to have you.
Thank you.
Careful, assistant.
Oh, he- Yeah. He's still the same person,
right? Okay, I don't see any more comments about this,
so it is closed. Thank you. So I think, counselors,
what we are here to determine is do you
think we should make some type of
money, some type of fund available either through the city or
by making a donation? Um, if you
do, do you have some comments on the amount?
Um, and yeah, I think that's it. You're commenting
whether we should, how we should, and how much we should or
should not. Um, Counselor Matthews.
I'll go first 'cause I'm probably going to be in the minority.
So,
I don't know if anybody watched the school board meeting last night.
Mm-hmm.
I was very glad to see that the chairman of the board stood up and said that we
need to be very cautious
of every dime that we spend. Uh,
my phone was filled with text messages and personal emails
from community members, teachers, ed
techs, and, I know there's a lot
of
charities out there. I know that Home has set a goal for this
for five hundred thousand dollars, and I believe currently I've been told they're
at four hundred and eighty something thousand, and
us adding a hundred and fifty thousand would put them well over the--
close to six hundred, over six hundred thousand.
So, I
understand everybody's thought process on this, I really
do, but,
you know, there's a lot of charities that reach out to me all the time, "Can you
give? Can you give?" Well, I can only give what I can afford,
and I'm not sure that people are really, really paying attention
that city of South Portland is financially in big trouble right
now. They really are. And
as a counselor, we have to look at the big picture.
We can't just look at, at a small picture.
We have to look at the big picture for everybody.
And I'm not just saying that this is just a school department problem
because school department is sixty-two percent of the
entire budget. And we have been told also,
as well as a city council, that the city side is
going to be very tight this year as well.
So I'm not sure that it makes any financial sense
to the entire city
to be giving taxpayer money to an
organization that we, we just can't afford right now.
We cannot afford it. Our taxes have, have gone through
the roof. We have a Pearl Street pump station that we
absolutely have to have, or all your sewer stuff's
gonna be backing up into your houses and stuff,
and- ... we need to pay for that.
And, yes, as funny as that sounds, it's not funny.
No, I'm not laughing.
Um-
I just thought it was rather graphic
... but the thing is, is we just absolutely need to
be, as the school board chair said, cautious of
every dime we spend. So I, I do not
support, funding anything to,
support this when we have a good GA system.
I'm going to point of order myself.
I was not making any editorial comment-
No, that's fine. No, I just-
... on what you said. I just, sometimes you speak colorfully.
I do.
Um, Counselor West.
I guess we could just go around the room, huh?
Well, we could, or we'll go back and forth.
Um, okay. I, I just wanna say, I think every- I can...
Of the things we agree on in this room, we all agree that the
ICE surge was a, a terribly difficult thing and a
horrible thing for the, all of our communities, not just
our people of color, but all of us. And yet
we have to, as counselors, balance a lot of
factors, and one of the factors is that the surge
lasted four days and that less than five
people were arrested in South Portland.
The, the bulk of the surge was Portland and Lewiston.
Um, and the- we've heard now tonight there were no ICE activities at our
schools. And there's another factor, too.
I am personally familiar with people of color who
had reason to fear, and yet who did work, who
did pay their rent, as I've told you all, that we're a landlord.
And so in some senses, we have to
support those people, too, the ones that were willing to take a
risk and that were willing to continue to fulfill their obligations, because that
also needs to be rewarded. I praise the
First Congregational Church. Thank you for all you've done.
I certainly would urge anyone in the community to make donations
to these organizations,
and I wanna pick up on what
Counselor Matthews said, because when you go to the Project Home
Emergency Housing Fund, which says, "All donations support
households unable to cover housing costs due to the loss of income
from ICE enforcement and fear of detention," and
they've raised four hundred eighty-three thousand toward their goal of five hundred
thousand. And where I'm coming from is that I would be
willing, because of... it is a, it's an,
it's very important, and yet at the same time, I did listen
to the, I did listen to the school board last night.
And I mean, those are our children.
Those are our children, and the future of our community, and we
have a, a situation that is grim with our
school budget, not to mention all our other issues.
So if we gave twenty thousand dollars to Project
Hope, that would take them over the top of their five hundred thousand
dollar goal. It would be a, an indication that our
community cares, it would be an indication that we're making a contribution
that would, in all likelihood, cover the families that were directly affected
in our community, and, and that's what I would be willing to
support.
Thank you, Counselor West. Anyone want to go next?
Counselor Scott. Thank you.
Um, I obviously have thought a lot about this, and I, I
think coming into this meeting, I was actually closer to having sort
of a city-administered fund, but hearing, I think, the comments
from Scott and from the public- ...
I, I am more in favor of doing something through a nonprofit, and that is with
the caveat that it would not be a sort
of unrestricted blanket amount. I think that
amount, if we were to decide upon an amount, I would like that to
be on sort of a as-needed basis, that we would have an
allocation that would be available to them on an as-needed basis to move forward
with supporting South Portland families.
Um, I am more in the hundred thousand
dollar range, thinking about the sort of data that we got that
there might be a hundred and sixty-eight thousand dollars of sort of
South Portland need, maybe eighty or so families.
Obviously, there's a lot of money that has gone into that nonprofit to support a
lot of those, needs already, so I don't know that we need
to sort of fully fund that, but I'm more in the sort of hundred thousand dollar
range thinking about the fact that I think there will still be some
more needs coming forward, and, and if this program is rolled
out, maybe that will encourage more people to come forward.
Um, I understand, as all of us do, the constraints
on our budget and what we're looking at.
I see eighty families as being eighty students who
may not be in that school system next year, and that's a
much bigger financial burden than a hundred thousand
dollars. So I think thinking about eighty
families that we can support staying in South Portland and contributing to
our economy and the rent and supporting, you know, our
city, supporting the school system, that seems to me an
incredibly small investment in keeping those
families here, and
I think supporting a massive
disaster of our federal government to be,
I think, understating my feelings about that.
So I, I am very in favor of providing some support.
I think it should be in the hundred thousand dollar range.
I like the idea of a nonprofit and that it would have some conditions in terms of
not being a blanket sort of check, but
that's, that's where I am. And I, I think we ha- we, we have to do something.
This is absolutely atrocious. This is impacting
families. I don't care if they were afraid
or actually lost income or whatnot, we have to sort of right
a very ma- major wrong, and I, I think as much as I
appreciate the data that was provided from our police chief, I think that is
incredibly understating what has actually been happening in our community
and what has happened over a longer period of time than just the,
the date stated. So that's where I am.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Do we have someone who would like to go next?
Councillor Walker
I can go. I'm in full support of this.
Um, I-- To the points that were made before about
the amount that Project Home is hoping to fundraise and that
$500,000,
the director of Project Home stated that there's four hundred and seven households
in the greater Portland area in need of assistance right now, and with average
rents being $2,100 for a two bedroom, that puts the current
need that Project Ho-Home has at
$854,700. And so that five
hundred thousand doesn't even get them close to meeting their current known
need. And the fact that there are eighty known households in South Portland,
eighty of our friends and neighbors, our community members that are in dire
need, I think it is vital that we support them.
Um, I'm in support of giving the full one hundred and sixty-eight thousand.
I think Project Home should administer it.
I'd be open-- I'm fine with giving a donation, but I'd be open to Carter Scott's,
Councilor Scott's suggestion of, and
kind of as needed
fund. Um, but I, I think that this is so
important. I understand that the surge on paper was short, but I
know, I know that there is still fear in the community, and I know that people are
still afraid to go to work. They're still afraid to send their kids to school.
They're still-- Even for those who missed work for a short amount of
time, when you're living on an incredibly tight budget, any lost
income sets up a snowball effect. You know, it costs a lot to be
poor, a lot, because you can't really save for rainy
day funds. And so if someone missed a week of work and then there was a medical
need, then that rent money is gonna get assessed to that medical need.
Or if they're afraid of being unable to feed their children because they can't
leave their house, they're gonna tap into their rent money to give to someone to
get them groceries so that they can feed their children.
So I'll get off my soapbox. But I am in full support.
I think we should do a hundred and sixty-eight thousand.
I think Project Home should administer it, and I'd be open to some sort of
report out. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Councilor Walker.
Um, we have Councilor Pride and Councilor Coleman.
Who would like to go next?
I wanna hear what Misha has to say first. Thank you. I'm sorry.
Okay. I'm on the spot. Um, so
I am very much appreciative of the mayor for bringing this
forward. I think I'm among the people who asked her to do so.
So thank you, Mayor Tipton. Um,
I am-- I'm in favor of doing something.
I'm-- You know, when we, when we
said no to the moratorium, I think I made it pretty clear
that I was saying no to the moratorium 'cause it's a sledgehammer, because it's
affecting people who may,
not get... Sorry. S-that, that, that it's affecting people who may
not have been affected by ICE at all.
Um, this feels more like a scalpel.
This feels more like we sh- what we should be doing.
Um, I am, uh-- I
appreciate the nonprofit approach.
I think that can be good. I also appreciate
the, reimbursement approach with some
kind of verification accountability measure thrown in there.
'Cause I-- One thing that is a little bit...
And, and this is not a reason I'm not going to support it, but one
piece of this that's a little bit sort of a nag at the back of my brain is
that, you know, if Project Home is gonna help X number of South Portland
households with the money they do have, and then we supply them with more
money, then they can use that same money they had already allocated to South
Portland to help other communities.
Mm-hmm.
So in some ways, we're subsidizing the area.
But I think the approach to
homelessness, housing issues should be a regional approach. You know?
And if South Portland puts some money towards that regional approach, maybe
other, maybe other communities will, will follow our lead.
Um,
so
I, I am in favor of this. Um, I think that there's
another aspect that sort of is, is sort of falling away here.
We-- Landlords who did not get paid are not getting that money
back, no matter if they evict the person or not. They're just not...
I mean-
Yeah
... they may be able to make some kind of payment plan, and maybe eventually,
but by doing this, we're also supporting our landlords, the ones who've
continued to house our vulnerable populations.
And so
yeah, it, it's somewhat targeted in that way that, you know,
that... I think, you know,
we're, we're helping two populations here.
We're helping the population of people who are unhoused, vulnerable, and
that is, important to me. And so we are
also helping the landlords continue to house those people, not lose a
month or two rent. Um, and I think-- And I
understand the data approach. I, I get it, the five people removed, but
that doesn't mean that more wouldn't have been arrested had they not been
hiding in their apartments.
Yeah.
You know, that's un- That's un- immeasurable, right?
We can't, we can't know that for sure.
But there may have been more. I mean, I remember reading that story about the kid
in Westbrook who got in a fender bender, and because he got in a fender
bender, he was approached by ICE and taken away.
And before he knew it, he was in Massachusetts, and he was the breadwinner for his,
for his family. His, his mom was staying home with the kids, and, you know, he was
there to help out, but, you know, he's also a student.
Um,
and so, you know, that was a loss for them, and there was
fear there. Um, and if, if more South
Portland, community members were out there, you
know, driving, getting in fender benders or whatever, there might've been more
loss to our community. And I'm very thankful that there-- that it was only five,
but I'm also devastated that five people had that happen to them
and devastated that it happened to an entire community of people.
Um, and so I, I am in favor of moving
forward. Um, I think at this
pointI am sort of in the seventy-five to a
hundred range, just as a
starting point. Let's see how it works.
Let's see what we get for compliance data from, Project
HOME. I'm, I'm okay with using Project HOME.
Um, and if the need seems great, to the point where
it, you know, where we have
more data to work with, then, then maybe we, we see another
month happen later. But,
you know, let's, let's see what, what we get with what we're
willing to give at this point.
All right. Thank you very much, Councilor-
And, you said funding amount source-
All right
... I, fund balance. Sorry, I wanna answer all the questions.
Um, so I think I said the answer is yes to the first one,
Project HOME. Second one, funding amount
source, seventy-five to a hundred from fund balance.
Um, and I think, you know, to the extent we can make sure that
these funds are helping those people who are affected by,
the, the ICE enforcement action, we should do
so. I know it's impossible to do that perfectly, but,
we should attempt to do, to, to measure it in some
way.
Thank you.
And thank you, Misha, because,
so, yes, we're do-- I want us to do something as
a community. Uh, Project HOME sounds like
they're already established, and I'm gonna go with
Rosemary's at, like,
50K, and then evaluate and,
but to a max of 150 by
June 1st.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Um,
okay. Um-
From the fund balance.
Yes.
Um, all right. Well, I will be reasonably quick.
Um, yes, I am a yes on the financial
assistance. Many people have expressed things that I believe
already. I'm go- But I am gonna start with Councilor Matthews
because he said that we have to consider everybody in our community, and
we always, always do. And from my
perspective, this is the... What we're talking about is p- are
families in our community who were harmed by something
absolutely unprecedented, and something that I feel is
un-American, is not something that I, when I say that pledge,
that I think is acceptable. Um,
so I'm, I'm saying they are, they are everybody, and
we need to help the members of our community.
Um, I also keep in mind all the landlords who were in here
in February,
talking about how they would do their best not to evict folks.
But for some of them, the smaller landlords, and
even the larger ones could feel the impact of, you know, not
receiving, rent. So I, I feel like we're advocating for
them as well. And, I don't know if I
need to make any more points about that.
Um, preferred delivery model, I will talk about that because
through, through the weekend when I was thinking about if this happened, I was very
much a, "City must administer," because it is our
responsible as a, it is our responsibility as a council to make sure there's clear
oversight, accountability for the use of municipal funds, and the city is the only
way to do that. However, I did get a lot
more information about how Project HOME would verify
need, how they would limit assistance to one
month, that they pay the landlords directly.
Absolutely, that's the program that they had set up a while ago
for any kind of eviction help. Um,
anyway, that just, it, it, it demonstrates to me that there are
meaningful safeguards in place, and that if we support that
approach, we not only would address immediate housing stability
need, but we would also meet our council responsibility to ensure
that the dollars are being used responsibly and for what we wanted them to
be used for. Funding amount source, I think I'm a one
fifty kinda gal on this one, and, the
source is as we've discussed. And any additional
program requirements or restrictions, guess all I would say
about the one fifty is we have heard that there are South
Portland families needing an average of more than two thousand
each that uses more than one fifty.
So as far as us feeling responsible in that we have, you
know, restricted that amount to only to those eighty
families, it feels like that's what we're doing.
So that's where I'm at. Councilor Scott?
Could I offer
maybe a compromise between what I've heard?
I, I wonder if councilors would be in favor of
going up to $100,000 in the near
term, again, on a reimbursement basis, not on a full grant
basis, and reevaluating this in a
month. Just-
So I... So say again, you would see us making some type of initial
donation and then reevaluating?
Yes, to start it. I mean, I've heard, I think, from zero to
168, so just thinking about sort of,
um-
Do it when you have a motion on the floor.
If... Oh, I'm sorry. Thank you, Rosemary.
I don't know that we'll be doing motions in the middle of a workshop.
That's what I'm saying. You don't...
That's why you shouldn't be having this conversation.
All right, so we... Excuse me. Sorry.
We shouldn't be hearing from audience members either.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, I think we actually can have this conversation during the workshop.
All right. So-We have had the workshop
conversation, let's just say we've had the
workshop conversation. Our job was to answer these
questions
Mm-hmm
I'm not sure what, what are we doing with the
idea that that there is now a
recommendation that maybe... I
mean-
Sorry, I thought it was just workshop-
Yeah
... discussion and conversation.
Yeah, that's kind of what I thought too.
You can have this conversation.
Yes. Councilor West-
Yes
... wants us to-
Why don't we agree on our process? Is it going to be that for our next meeting
there will be some kind of an order on the agenda?
That's-
I think that's what how-
And we could debate the amount at that time.
We could.
And I think we will.
Me too .
And I think that we have answered our workshop questions, and that
therefore we can move to the next workshop
item.
Point of order.
Yes.
We... So I understand this is a workshop.
We are actually not able to make...
Unless we were to adopt the ordinance, we're not actually making any decisions.
This is advising c- city staff, and next meeting is our-
I think what, where we have advised city staff is to bring back
an order that would say, "We're taking this
from... We're taking these monies," and it will have an amount in it,
and at that time we'll discuss whether to amend the amount.
And just to be clear, I took the average of what everyone
suggested- ... and it came out to about,
94,000, so I'd round to around 100 is probably what would, what would appear in the
order, and you all can debate that, and you can put stipulations on it that
w- we agree that we'll do more, if the need
presents itself, if you wanted to do that. So.
Can't wait for the next meeting.
Yes. Councilor Walker.
May I ask a parlam- parliamentary question?
You can ask it. We'll see who can answer it.
Um, as this was a workshop item and we're agreeing to move forward with it,
is there, is there a part of our process that can skip the first
read, and we can just go to the second read?
Or-
Yes. It, it's just an order, so no ordinance.
No.
So one order, one vote-
We're done
... and then, the only delay is how long does it take us to cut the check.
Excellent. Thank you. That is what I wanted to know.
Or you're doing it on a reimbursement basis-
All right
... so that's-
Right. Got it
... which is probably, um-
That's exactly what I needed.
Yeah.
Thank you.
I think our council feels satisfied. We've done the work.
We understand what we've recommended, and we will call this
workshop done. Bike share program
and ordinance is our next workshop item.
Great. Thank you, Councilor. So next up, we have a
presentation from, members of our sustainability
staff, if I can get to that
item,
to talk about,
the, possibility or council's interest in, standing up a bike share
program and an associated, ordinance that would
govern, if such a program were established here, some of the
guardrails that it would need to operate under.
And so, I'm gonna turn it to over to our sustainability director, Julie
Rosenbach, and our sustainability program manager, Megan
Daly, who will talk a little bit, or, about
what a bike program, bike share program is, why an ordinance would be
important, et cetera. Ultimately, the, the guidance, which I will again at the
end put up on the sh- screen, is, does council support the
framework, that's been established, or do you have any additional tweaks,
and also, any suggestions if you wanna go
the... If you agree that an ordinance is important to have in place, do you
have any comments, or suggestions on that, it, for, for
staff to bring forward, for a first reading in the future?
So, I'm trying to buy you time while you figure out the,
screen share.
Got a meeting.
Did you get it?
There we go.
Thank you.
All right.
There you go.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Wow.
Hi, everybody. Julie Rosenbach-
Yes
... sustainability director. What-
You may need to come closer to that microphone. I'm not sure.
That's for the TV folks.
Okay. How's that?
I think that's good.
Okay. Um, wow. So Megan's already set it
up. I, I just wanna frame this,
discussion. Um,
the idea of a bike share program, as Megan's gonna talk about,
is in our One Climate feature plan.
Um, we have been maneuvering with this idea of a bike share
program for a couple of years, and it's had fits and starts.
And it started with our, former transportation program
coordinator. Then we had sort of a new temporary staff who, who
didn't quite work out. Um, and
so it's, it's been, it's undergone some different
iterations and, good times and bad times.
Megan, started in my office about seven months
ago?
Eight months ago, and has picked this up, along with so many other things, in
earnest, and has set it back sort of on the right track.
And so that's my introduction, and Megan is gonna take it over, now.
Thank you.
Uh, Megan Daly, sustainability program manager in the
sustainability office. Um, so,
yes, the pur-
Here we go. The purpose of this presentation is to bring forward a bike share
ordinance framework
and to assess City Council's interest in bringing a bike share program to
South Portland. They go hand in hand.
So in this, presentation, we're gonna provide some background information on
bike share, key findings from a public survey that
we ran, a proposed framework for this
bike share ordinance,
as well as a brief overview of what a bike share program
in South Portland might look like, to help inform your
deliberations. And then finally, we have a few questions,
to, guide the, the,
the input that we receive from
council.So, a little bit of
background on why we are bringing this
forward. So first,
the motivation for exploring a bike share reflects goals included
in the One Climate Future plan. Um,
approximately thirty percent of South Portland's greenhouse gas
emissions come from the transportation
sector. And a key milestone in the
plan is that five percent of all trips should be completed by bike
by twenty forty. And the plan also speaks
to the need to revisit efforts to launch a bike
share program in the cities
of, Portland and South Portland.
Portland has already established theirs, South Portland obviously is
still considering this. So
evidence, that is based on the experience of
small, medium, and large cities, shows
that bike share can benefit-- generate a range of
benefits. Um, this includes, increasing the
percentage of people who, commute by bike.
Um, a nationwide study showed that when both transit and bike
share are available, fifty percent of users used
both.
And additionally, all of this can translate
to really substantial reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions.
So there are two primary reasons that we think,
it's prudent to consider moving a bike share
program into the transportation mix in South Portland.
First is to facilitate a mode shift away from car trips
to bike trips, and the second is to increase equitable
access to resilient transportation
options. So d-- reduced car
dependency will reduce carbon emissions, and bike share
can help fill those first and last mile connectivity
gaps so that people can, better access public
transit if they're not close to a bus stop or, if
they arrive at a bus stop and they just need to go that last little
bit. A key consideration for our bike share
program, would be thinking about
interoperability with Portland's bike share system.
So for example, we heard the example of, it being
difficult to get to Portland from SMCC or other parts of South
Portland. Um, so if a student at SMCC, has an
internship in another part of the city or needs to get across the river,
bike share might help them do that more effectively.
Um, experience also shows that, when people
engage in using bike share, that extends to their bike use outside
of bike share. So, it, it's building a bike culture, and
people use bikes more frequently outside of bike share with their
personal bikes. And we know that with more cyclists on the road,
that increases visibility, it makes the road safer for
everybody. So the second piece is that bike
share can lower the bar to entry for riding a bike.
Um, it can be more convenient and cost-effective for those residents who
might not be able to invest in a bike, or
it's difficult for them to maintain their own bike or store it.
Storage can be a real problem. Um, bike share can also
attract new bike riders. Um, it's a low commitment way of
testing it out. Do I like biking around?
Um, is this something I wanna do in the future more?
And then I can make an investment.
And finally, bike share can contribute to transportation
resilience. Um, so if transit isn't reaching the places that people
need to go, this might help fill that gap, while
promoting sustainability, equity, and
connectivity.
So again, a bike share program we feel is an
investment in South Portland's future, addressing transportation challenges
while promoting those pieces of sustainability, equity, and
connectivity.
So to gather broader input on a bike share
program, we conducted a public
survey. And the survey was open
for two months, between November twenty-eighth and January
thirtieth. Uh, we sent out, mail
surveys to, a random sample of seven hundred and fifty addresses in
South Portland. Um, we used city newsletters and social
media, which had a digital survey link.
We had, mailing lists and, the
su-sustainability office social media.
We had flyers and handouts at key locations and events throughout the
city that also had the digital survey link.
And we also had, physical paper surveys available at City
Hall so that people could fill them out and drop them in the box.
And we received responses from every neighborhood in the
city.
So when we asked a key question of, "How interested would
you be in having a bike share program in South Portland?" Um,
fifty-two percent of residents indicated that they would
be either very or somewhat interested in having a bike share program
in South Portland. Um, thirty-three percent of
respondents said they were not interested or,
not interested at all, and fifteen percent of residents
were neutral. Notably, forty-one
percent of respondents who currently-- who don't currently own a
bike, 'cause we did ask that question,
were interested in a bike share program.
So forty-one percent of folks who don't have a bike already are interested in
bike share.
Among, the residents who are interested in bike
share, fifty-three percent said they would like to use bike
share for multiple purposes. Um, so running errands was the
most frequent response, with recreation and exercise
being the next most frequentUm, but it's interesting
that the majority of the recreation and exercise responses, because this was
a, a select all that apply, seventy percent of
those folks indicated some other use that they would like to
combine with recreation and
exercise. Um, commuting and
connecting to transit were less frequent
responses.
Um, so when we asked folks if they had concerns about a bike
share in South Portland, lack of bike infrastructure and
traffic concerns were by far the most frequent
responses. These se-received almost,
double, any of the other responses.
So that really stood out as something that people were worried
about. Uh, user skill, cost, helmet
availability, and station locations all received roughly in
the vicinity of a hundred responses each.
Um, and this was a select all question, so people could choose multiple of
these.
We also asked an open-ended question at the end of the survey,
and, people provided their input, and we grouped these into some of
the, the major things we were hearing.
So first was that people were really, asking
for a concurrent investment in transit systems.
So this pairs really nicely with the discussion with Metro tonight,
but people wanted to be able to connect these two
things. The second was that, people
wanted a regional connectivity. So that interoperability with
Portland, for example, being able to do a one-way trip from South Portland to
downtown Portland without having to park their car, was something that people
really thought would be valuable.
Um, people reiterated their strong concern about
safety. Um, they wanted bike lanes and less dangerous road
design, particularly on Broadway,
Westbrook, and in the mall area.
There was also a desire for training.
Um, this is both for the cyclists who would use the bike share program, but
also for drivers. Um, they're on both sides of that
equation. Um, just safer, safer road
behavior, for both cyclists and drivers.
And then finally, there was concern about the potential cost of a program
and questions about whether, this is, the best
inve-investment relative to other things that we could be putting money
toward. And this was mentioned in a little less than ten
percent of the open-ended
responses.
So,
the key survey takeaways are, we did learn that a
majority of respondents are interested in a bike share
program. Um, and
that bike share can serve multiple needs and
purposes in our city. Um, notably, many
residents own bikes, but are not riding.
Um, and that, that has a lot to do with those concerns about road
safety, and traffic concerns.
Um, and so those are things we need to be looking at in
tandem. So any efforts to develop a bike share
program, should be coupled with improvements to bike
infrastructure and education. And in some good news, the city
has received a community action grant, to move forward on
developing a citywide, bike ped master
plan. And we've also been taking concrete steps, like the
launch of the Cash Thornton Neighborhood Byway that provides a
safe route for our middle schoolers to bike or walk to
school. And we also have our Complete Streets policy and
Complete Streets design manual in place.
So, I think we are already taking meaningful steps
on those infrastructure questions, and, and
hopefully those improvements will be realized, alongside any
potential bike share program.
Okay, so getting into the framework,
we, incorporated our information gathering
efforts as well as guidelines developed by the National
Association of City Transportation Officials, or NACTO.
So if you hear me say NACTO, it's referring to that organization that developed
these guidelines. Um, the framework that we're putting forward,
has three areas: general terms and conditions, general
operations, and system design.
So under general terms and conditions, we propose
including just a basic definition of a bike share system.
So what are we regulating? Um, and building off
of the City of Portland's, adapting that to our context, it
could be something like a system of bicycles or electric bicycles that is made
available for rent for general public use, generally for
short periods of time, to include docks for storing bicycles when not in
use. Um, so that's the kind of, parameters that we would be
setting on what we're regulating.
We also recommend including a provision that any bike share operator
would have to seek legal permission via a license, permit, or
contract, or some combination thereof, to
operate. Um, we recommend that those be renewed
annually, and that just means that if, the
operator is not complying, with the, the agreement,
we have the, ability to, not renew that in the
future. Um, we also recommend that the
city, require the bike share operator,
to provide indemnity and hold appropriate insurance.
Um, there's also a provision to clarify that the bike share
operator will be responsible for any additional costs that might stem
from bike share. So that might be increased repair or maintenance
costs that stem from having bike share in the
city.Second,
under general conditions, we would like the ordinance to spell out safety and
maintenance requirements. Um, so first,
the operator should comply with local, state, and federal safety standards.
For example, the type of equipment that's used should meet those bas-basic
standards. Um, it's also
possible to set a maximum e-bike speed.
So for example, NACTO recommends a maximum speed of twenty
miles per hour, for a bike share program.
Um, but council could s-consider something lower, for example, fifteen
miles per hour if they felt the twenty miles per hour was, not
appropriate.
Finally, there's the possibility to limit the number of bikes in the system or
define how regularly these should be rebalanced, 'cause a bike share
system, you occasionally need to move the bikes around to make sure the bikes are
available at all stations at all times.
With regard to maintenance, NACTO recommends full monthly
checks,
and weekly street checks. Uh, we believe that more
frequent checks for e-bikes would be wise, and this could be on the
order of every one to three days. Um, the ordinance should
also specify what records need to be kept of that maintenance
and how they should be submitted to the city so that we can make sure that the bike
operator is doing what they said they were going to
do.
So we also recommend that the City of South Portland reserve the right
to approve key aspects of the system design.
In some cities, they leave it up to the, the bike share operator to
make those decisions, but we think it would be important for South Portland to have
control over those aspects. Um, so this can
include, pricing and payment options, for
example, a monthly or annual membership
that could reduce the cost for frequent riders and cash
payment options, to reduce access
barriers. Um, notably, we really want to
ensure that the pricing is affordable for short trips while
being less cost effective for longer trips,
and to reduce competitions with, businesses that
might, provide bike rentals on a longer duration
basis. We also strongly recommend,
allowing only bikes that are docked at a fixed station.
Some bike shares allow you to park, wherever you
arrive. Um, we do not recommend this.
Um, we've had discussions with our Parks and Recreation department and Public Works
director, and so, these will be docked stations,
i-in areas that are away from sidewalks, but in the
public right of way.
Um, we also recommend the inclusion of e-bikes,
and the reason for this is that it extends the range that people can
go using the bike share system. Um, but we want a mix
potentially of these conventional, pedal bikes and e-bikes.
Um, for example, Portland has a fifty-fifty mix.
Um, and finally, we think that the ordinance should allow South Portland,
to approve the station locations.
We wanna make sure that these are in locations that are going to be close to
important services that our residents need to
access. Okay, so
what, what would a potential bike share program
look like in South Portland? I'm just gonna provide a high-level overview,
so you can envision how it might work.
So first of all, we think that there are five key principles that should
guide any potential program that might come to fruition.
This is, we want it to be accessible, affordable,
safe, transit-oriented, and
reliable. Um, and in the following slide, we just
talk a little bit about what that would look like in
practice. So, in
terms of operations, the operator will be responsible for
launching and managing the bike fleets and stations on a day-to-day
basis. Um, that includes, payments,
as well as, the installation of the
stations in the spring and the removal in the fall because they get removed
over the winter season. Um, we propose that
the bike share start as a one-year pilot with forty
bikes across eight stations with twenty conventional and twenty
e-assist. And again, this, this notion of
requiring the operator to be inter-interoperable with the Portland
bike share we think is a really important piece.
In terms of safety, we would like to require all users, and indeed,
most bike share operators would require this, to read and sign an
agreement, to follow the rules of the road, and to
strongly encourage helmet use. Um, as a side
note, adults over the age of sixteen are not required to wear bike
helmets in Maine, and bike share operators typically don't provide
them, because of logistical and sanitary reasons.
Um, but there are options that we can pursue for increasing access
to helmets, such as partnering with the Bicycle Coalition of Maine
to do helmet giveaways, in the spring when people are
starting up their bike season, et cetera.
Um, we also wanna have educational signage at each of the bike
stations, as, as a, an additional reminder
of how to bike safely, and,
what the rules of the road are. For maintenance, the
operator will be responsible for the day-to-day monitoring of the, the
bikes themselves as well as the stations.
But there are two options that have been presented to us, as,
possibilities for performing maintenance.
The first is that the bike share hires a local field technician
who would, conduct that maintenance on a regular basis.
Um, there's also the possibility that the bike share operator could
contract with a local bike repair shop who would perform the
needed maintenance.Okay,
so, funding. Um, this is an, an
important question. Um, the establishment of a bike share
program in South Portland was identified as a high priority by
MaineDOT in their three-year work plan.
Uh, based on this, we anticipate one hundred thousand dollars of,
state funding being available in 2026,
pending council's interest in pursuing the program.
However, this would require a twenty, twenty thousand dollar
match in the FY27 CIP to
unlock this funding, and there would be no funding obligation
beyond year one. Um, if the program continues into the
future, there are three funding sources which, based
on an estimate from Tandem Mobility, which runs Portland's
bike share program, would include, twenty percent user fees
and memberships, sixty percent sponsorships and
advertising revenue, and, twenty percent
grants, or municipal budget.
So, given for the potential, of bike share to
address South Portland's climate and transportation goals, by
promoting sustainability, equity, and connectivity, we request,
city council's feedback to determine the trajectory and next
steps. Um, specifically, staff is seeking guidance
on, whether this regulatory framework,
meets South Portland's needs or whether there are adjustments that council would
like to see, prior to any further
consideration. And,
should s- city staff proceed with the formal drafting of
ordinance language to bring to council for further consideration.
So, I'd just like to thank you for,
bringing bike share to the workshop schedule.
We really appreciate the opportunity to have the conversation, and we welcome your
questions.
Thank you very much. Um, is Julie saying
anything in addition? Okay. So, thank
you. All right.
Can you go back one slide?
Yeah.
Thank you.
I, I think we have our first question. Can you go back one slide?
Mike clicking, actually do Mike clicking it off that 'cause I've got a-
Okay, sure.
I- I've backed it up even. I think those considerations are
important, but the first threshold question is, is this something council's even
interested in? And then if yes, we kind of get into those two questions as
proposed by, by Megan. So, thank you.
Do you have what you need, Counselor?
It should be coming up there in a second.
Okay.
I mean-
So we're gonna do two different... Oh, wow. We are so tricky.
Takes a little bit to... There you go.
Oh. No, I thought we were gonna see something different. Okay.
Okay. Um, I don't think we need to answer those questions
quite yet because that's usually what we do at the end.
So did anyone have questions of our presenter?
Thank you, Counselor West.
Um, first I wanna point out that there's a discrepancy in the
match because the staff report says the match would be twenty-five
thousand, but I believe your oral remarks and the memo
say twenty thousand.
Yes, that's correct. Um, so the, that amount was supposed to
be updated, but the actual amount, and we confirmed
with, GP Cog today, is a twenty thousand dollar match.
Okay. And have you... What, where do you think the eight stations would
go?
Um, that would be something that we would have to, determine.
Um, we did receive feedback in the survey regarding
priority areas. Um, so there's a lot of considerations that go into
station location. Um, but that would be
a later step.
And you said that you would be contracting with a company to run the
program. Have you talked to any companies, or do you have any idea what
company, or how do you go about choosing one?
Um, so for example, the city of Portland went out to
RFP to select their bike share operator.
Um, we have had conversations with Tandem Mobility, which
runs Portland's program, just to understand,
how their program works, how they manage their operations, and what
that could look like.
Thanks. Those are my questions.
Thank you. Further questions, Counselor Scott?
Um,
do you have any sense of what the Portland
bike share
kind of size and costs are? And, and it sounds like you have
not yet reached out to a private company about a South Portland option
with forty bikes.
Um, so the information we did get from Tandem Mobility
was,
to understand what that one hundred and twenty thousand dollars of
funding could achieve, and it was the, the forty bikes and eight
stations.
Okay. So one twenty gets you forty bikes, twenty regular, twenty
e-bikes across South Portland?
Yes, in eight stations.
For a year?
For a year.
Okay.
Other questions? I've got a quick
question. The, surveying, of course, was residents
only, right?
Mm-hmm.
So just maybe even based on Portland's experience, what do we know about
tourism interest in the bike share, in a bike share program?
Um, that was not a question that we asked on the survey.
Um, I know that Portland,
targets a range of users. Um, they do have bike share
along their waterfront, and so I think that is something
that is used potentially by tourists, but we don't have data available
on that. That would be something that, we could ask Portland if
they have any additional information, but not something that we have readily
available.
All right. And just-
Can I just add one-
I only ask because I'm just thinking, are tour- do tourists
love these things and they'll steal all the bikes that were meant for residents?
OrOr do tourists like help drive the
program actually? Or how does that work?
Tourists.
Yeah.
Bike tourists.
Okay. Um, I, so, not
recently, but,
when sort of a year after Portland,
established their bike share program, I called all the bike shops in
Portland, and then in fact there was a couple of, at least
one, maybe two, companies that just go
and, rent bikes to tourists. And so they
said, "Hey, we haven't seen our business go down."
If anything, the bike shops are like, "Well, we might see a little, uptick,"
but it, it, what, there wasn't really any major impact on, on
their businesses, so I'm, I'm not sure it would be
something, that tourists would seek out.
Mm.
The way that I, I, I, I know that Megan, covered it, but the way that we
would structure the pricing is not for take this
bike out for the afternoon to go somewhere.
It would be, it... The pricing would encourage people to take
it from one dock to the next and dock it.
So more of a transportation filler than sort of a, a
recreation,
a, a vehicle for, for
recreation. Um, the other thing I just wanna make sure is
that, we, we have an idea of where some
bike,
you know, racks could be placed and of course we have some survey feedback from
certain. I think what we would start with probably though is
like a grouping or, you know, a destination
based, you know, like a- an SMCC...
We al- we talked with SMCC like a year or two ago when we were
considering this, and they're like, "Yeah, absolutely.
It makes sense that, Broadway, you know, have a, a
bike share station at SMCC." I don't think having eight
stations spread all over the city is what we would start with.
We would group them some way, and make sure
that it fit with,
the next place that you wanna dock your bike.
S- okay. So-
But that would come, that would come after an ordinance.
So m- meaning it's not like, "Oh, we're taking one in
SMCC and we're taking another one in the mall, and then, you know, the
remaining six," blah, blah. You would maybe choose an area of the city that
made sense for a pilot program-
For a pilot
... and put all eight in that area.
I mean, not too little, but I don't know that we would spread all eight
across the city. That-
Okay
... that wouldn't make the pilot successful.
All right. Thank you.
Councilor Scott?
Sorry, one last question. Is it acceptable for the
match program to have a sponsor provide $20,000 and
that be the $20,000 match from the city, or does it have to come
from the city funds to be the
match?
And if you don't have an answer, that's totally fine.
That's such a good question. It is acceptable to the, for the, for the bike share
program, but I don't know that it's acceptable for DOT funding,
and I'd have to look into that more.
Okay. Thank you.
All right. Any other questions, councilors? Councilor Pride?
Would this
program, which seems to have some economic bent to it,
be something that we could fund at least partially with TIF
dollars?
Um, so that is actually something that the City of Portland is looking
into. Uh, it depends which type of TIF, I believe, and,
and, Scott and, Josh would be, much,
the city manager, and, would be
much better able to answer that question, but it is something that is
being explored in Portland.
Okay. We, we could look into that if this was something council's interested in.
Okay. All right. Thank you. Any other councilor questions
before we open it up for public comment?
S- sorry. Yeah, I just one more.
Oh, Councilor Scott?
Um,
i- is the, the grant I assume is, is part of
this program design, so that's like 100 and $100,000,
$20,000 as part of this program design.
I'm just wondering if there is like
a four bike or eight bike pilot
smaller option that you might have considered for one or two
areas of the city and not 40 and eight
stations. Sorry for the questions.
Um, Julie knows a little bit more of the history of this, but
there was an initial proposal to have a phased in approach
with a potentially a smaller number of stations
initially. Um, but in discussions that we had with folks who have worked
in bike share as well as, with the City of Portland, their
transportation director, density is a key
question in terms of making, bike share successful.
Um, so, we opted to for, look
at, a, a slightly larger pilot, because that
density, could help, people make better use of
it potentially, 'cause if there's only two stations, that might really
limit what people can do with it, and thereby, unnecessarily
restrict potential usership.
I very much appreciate that. Thank you.
Okay. Thanks. All right.
I just, I, I wanna add that, while when we were
thinking about the phased approach, like way back when we had to submit
tax projects, if you see the line item in the DOT
funding plan, it's, it's $300,000, but we scaled it back
to $100,000 because we didn't wanna come and ask you for
$65,000. So that's, I feel like, the minimum that would
make for a successful or not pilot.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Okay. I think we're gonna open this up to public comment.
The item bike share program, any
public comment on it?
Thank you.
Good evening, councilors. Can you guys hear me okay? Carl Epic.
I'm at two ninety-one Pine Street.
Um, I'm on the Bicycle Pedestrian Committee and have been for as long as it's
existed. Right, Rosemary? Um, I also just let you know that I've worked
for Tool Design now for a couple of years, and,
I was with PAX and GB Cog for twelve years.
Uh, I know a little bit about, bicycle infrastructure and
this, this, this thing that you're considering. A couple of things.
Um, also, I was a consultant on the One Climate Future, effort that was
done jointly with Portland, focusing on the transportation elements to that, to
that study. Um, bike share was one of the recommendations in that,
I think as Julie mentioned. And something that's key about
it is to think about it as infrastructure, just like you would buses,
transit,
roads, ferries, et cetera. And
it, it, it's complementary option to transit, to driving,
to walking, to everything. That said, when you build new
infrastructure, a one-year pilot, although it may
give you some data and give you some information about the program, in a place like
Maine, where our one year is really only five
months, I highly recommend that you think about this as a
multi-year, year commitment. Um, even though that's not what's been
proposed, that will more-- more likely to have success with the
program if you do decide to go forward with it, and you can do, those metrics
over multiple seasons. Um, another important thing is
that bicycling is not within just one municipality.
It's regional-
Mm-hmm.
-believe it or not, and that's another reason to support the e-bike aspect to
this. E-bikes let you go a lot further.
I think a lot of you are aware that the Eastern Trail bridges that are in
Scarborough are being built as we speak, and you will be able to bike
from Bug Light, well, from Portland, all the way to Kennebunk very soon,
basically off-road. And that's-- this is hu-- a huge win for the
region. Um,
so really just important to think about this as regional and therefore, yes,
and I saw Carter's thought, forty bikes, what are we doing with eight
stations? If you develop a system that's
k- you know, that integrates with the Portland system, which is why they're looking
at it that way, you don't just have whatever it is, eight, forty
bikes and eight stations. You really have that reciprocity with a system that
already exists. Um, can't exactly go out to bid that
way, but it's-- it helps with making the system and the opportunity
much more successful, and therefore the tax dollars, more
effective. Um, and I think that that's-- If anybody needs
any other questions about this or the resource, then reach out to me.
Uh, I really hope that you guys move forward with this.
It's important, and I think it is the future, for South Portland and the
region.
Thirty seconds.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else have a comment on this item?
Come on up.
Okay.
So this is a really funny position for me to be in because I love bicycling very,
very much. Um, I'm the owner of Lighthouse Bikes down the street.
Um, it is my life's m-mission to get as many people-
Say your name.
Oh, Leah Day. Yeah. It's my life's mission to get as many people on
bicycles as possible. I think it's an excellent way to experience the world.
Um, but here I am saying that I am opposed to bike share for South Portland,
for real- really three major reasons.
The first one, quickly, is safety.
I think you guys have all thought of that, but
people are not gonna wear helmets that are on these bike share programs.
They just don't. Um, I've never seen-- I've very rarely seen somebody
on a bike share program-- bike with a helmet.
Two, the people who are riding them don't have access to maps and all that.
They might have a sign at the kiosk, but they're not gonna know where to go,
for... And I'm thinking about people who aren't taking them every day, more the
tourist aspect. Um, I think also the infrastructure for biking
around here is very complicated, and without someone talking you through, for new
bikers, without someone talking them through how to get across the bridge, how to
get through complicated intersections, it's gonna be a cluster, I think, a
lot, especially if you're talking about hooking up with the Portland bicycles
there. We can't seem to figure out how to handle that bridge now with people
who are really accustomed to biking across it.
So as you go on the sidewalk, do on the road, what do you do?
Um, so you're just adding a lot of craziness.
And then also, when I-- Uh, my bike shop is located right at the bottom of the
bridge. Once a week, a bike comes in a bike share program.
The headset is loose, the brakes don't work, the batteries died, or they're
lost. Every week, and they, and they don't know what to do.
They don't know where to go. They don't know where the bike shops are.
Um, and then the last thing in the safety concern is that there's a thing about
biker responsibility. People who don't own these bikes, they don't care for them as
well. They're also not checking in and out with a real person.
They're just checking it and going.
So there's a lot more kind of, you know, just freewheeling on their bikes.
The other thing is, I guess I should just jump to this, as a business owner,
it's really hard to run a small business. I'm like, I hire eleven people.
I employ eleven people. Every year, I'm barely making it through, and the idea that
you're gonna consider hiring a national company to come in with a bike share
program is just like, ugh, how am I supposed to support my business and the
people who work there? Um, I've tried to get in conversations
with this previously before today.
I feel like it's-- I've been avoided, and I just think that we can think
more creativity-- cre-creatively.
We have, you know, you're talking about twenty thousand dollars.
That's a lot of money for bikes. You could get a lot of people bikes in
South Portland. They could own their bikes.
Thirty seconds.
You could do bicycle classes. You could do all kinds of interesting things.
There's a Gear Hub. It's a model of how to get people on bikes.
There's-- The police department has hundreds of bikes in their basement.
Let's find a way to get those bikes and get them into people's hands 'cause they're
just bikes that have been stolen over time.
Um,
yes. So there's a, there's many reasons that I'm opposed to this idea, and I'd love
to just continue the conversation how to get people on bikes.
But I don't-- I think this is very premature to do it this
way. Thank you very
much.
Go ahead, your name.
Hi, my name is Twain Braden, and I'm-- I have the privilege of
being Leah Day's husband and also her pro bono
legal counsel. So, a couple of things.
Uh, first of all, I think, she did sum it up, this idea of
weaponizing a large national company with a small, only
eleven employee, business. I think it is a very powerful force,
and it's not a, it's not a fair
fight. Um, I think that one of the things
that I've seen recently when I've had the privilege of being able to
travel, is the difference between
infrastructure as bicycles and infrastructure as we
all commonly know it. I was in Copenhagen last year,
and the extent of their signage, their,
literature, their bike lanes, it's an accepted part of their s-
the fabric of their city. If you all wanna do something, do what the
people in that survey said, which is improve our
infrastructure. Find a way to make biking in this city safe.
Invest that money, and you will see an, an exponential increase in
bicycling. And there's a disconnect between the
suggestion that somehow bike share programs are gonna clear the
skies and clearing the skies through more bike
usage. Your infrastructure that you build for bicycling,
that will have a direct connection between your interest in
clearing up the skies and environmental and using more
people-powered, y- you know, instead of, instead of
cars. There is absolutely a direct correlation between the amount of
money cities invest in their infrastructure.
And by that, I don't mean bike share programs, I mean those bike lanes and the
signs. Go to these other cities, Davis, California, all these other places that,
that have invested in it. It's a huge benefit to their communities.
And yes, a five-month winter is, is absolutely true.
And the other thing that you'll see in these places that have s- invested in these
bike share programs is these heaps of bicycles with these loose
headsets, ditched on people's lawns.
They find a way to hack the system. And no matter how you lean on this national
company... One showed up on Peaks Island on my lawn last year.
I called this national company. There was nobody there. I called again.
There was this bicycle, it's probably worth a thousand dollars, just de- deposited
on, on my lawn on Peaks Island, and I couldn't find a way to get through to whoever
it was to repatriate their thousand-dollar bicycle.
So it is a very difficult program to do.
And maybe a city of a greater size than South Portland could effectively do it, but
maybe after investing in the infrastructure that you need-
Thirty seconds
... so that the people who are here, who are living here, can actually bike
safely, around their communities. Thank you very much.
Obviously, we oppose it. Thank you.
Thank you.
Jack Reposa, Walnut Street. Um,
okay, there we go. Uh, I got a few
questions. How do I get to these bike locations from my
house? Do I drive my car to get a bike?
Do I ride the bus to get a bike? You know,
depending on where the bikes are. Uh,
also, another question is, do I have to have
insurance to ride the city bike? My own
insurance? Or are we covered by the city or
whatever? And,
let's see. I did have
one other question.
Oh, the infrastructure, just to follow up here.
Um, we don't have the infrastructure
like they were talking about, like these cities.
Portland, if you want to say, "Well, Portland's doing
this, and South Portland would like to go along," Portland's future
plans are to make a walking city, okay?
They, they want to stop the roads going into Portland, cut them
off so they can walk. They're building these condos.
They're building these apartments.
It's gonna be people walking and biking, and that's what
basically we're hearing here. The cities that have these
bicycle, you know, bike paths and,
and, they've done it for a number of years.
And they, now they've, they have it, and it's
basically in walking areas, and we just don't have that
infrastructure. And who's gonna pay for the infrastructure for the bikes?
The city? The taxpayers when we have to get
infrastructure, paint the roads?
R- right now, you know, you're riding on some of these roads, and you're riding on
the side of the road, not on a sidewalk, and cars are going by
basically one way or the other at thirty or thirty-five miles an hour or
more, and
there's not even any bike lanes.
So there's an infrastructure cost, so who's gonna pay for that?
So tho- those are my questions if, you know, if I can get
somebody, you know, some answers. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, we do try to answer
questions, but let me just see if anyone else wants to
speak. Uh-huh.
Bill Weinberg, Parrot Street.
And, I'm a biker. I have an e-bike.
I'm eighty years old, so I don't pedal, as much as
I used to. Um, but I love to bike. I
bike,
try and bike year-round. Whenever the w- roads are
clear, I bike. I don't care if, if it's over
freezing. If it's above freezing, I bike.
And,
the main thing I'm concerned with is,
infrastructure. Um,
that's what we need. And
to, to, yeah, get-- Like they say,
there are plenty of bikes. People, people
could get bikes very cheaply if they really wanted to
bike. The reason they don't wanna bike is because of the
infrastructure.And so if we took that
$20,000 and helped out with the
infrastructure, that would be much better spent
money, money spent. And also, I
noticed that, this, I may be wrong on this, but,
in the proposal, the funding, the
100,000 from the DOT only goes for one
year. After that, the city would have to come up with all
the money, which would make it
120,000. So that's a big
chunk, that you have to
consider. So,
I, I'm, all in favor of biking
and, I think that,
if, if there was more, pla- places
to bike, and of course
I definitely want to keep it legal
to bike on the, eastern trail
and on the green belt and also on the sidewalks, 'cause there's
some talk about banning that. If they, if they
ban those things, that would be the end of biking in
this city. So I'm worried about that
too. But,
I, I think this proposal, would be...
The money would be better spent in
infrastructure. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else? Come
on. Come on. Don't be
shy.
Bite the hand that feeds me. Hi, I'm Jeff Woodbury.
I live on Hobart Street, and yes, I'm a member of the South Portland Bike Ped
Committee. Um, I'm gonna bite the hand that feeds me.
Um,
I agree with Richard Matthews. It's like we have to be extremely
careful where we spend money nowadays, and I don't
see this as a good solution for South Portland,
and I have a few reasons. How many people here, show of hands, have ever used bike
share?
All right, a handful of people have.
I have nine bike and scooter apps on my phone.
I use this a lot, and I use it in big cities, New York, Los
Angeles, Austin, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Smallest city I've ever used it in is probably Portland or Santa
Barbara, which has a great program.
They're all, as you said, sir, you are gonna drive somewhere,
park your car, and then bike around and go back and drive
away. Where are people going to go?
Where are they gonna take it to? We're gonna put eight locations in.
We've gotta keep them tight so you can go from one to another.
So, no, I'm not doing a trip to the mall.
I'm not gonna grab one in my neighborhood and go somewhere.
I'm gonna drive to Mill Creek and then maybe drive to Bud Light and
back. I'm gonna
maybe go from SMCC to
Mill Creek and back, 'cause we've gotta pack these together in a
very close area. And as you say, the money goes
away after a year. Somebody said that. And so...
And if we've got all these bikes in the, the cops' basement, why aren't we
hauling these out and starting a, Portland maker space
and start building bikes and putting them on the road?
And as an avid bike rider, yeah, the streets are terrible.
The drivers are terrible.
Yeah.
Um,
I love biking. I want to see more of it.
I just don't see South Portland being the tourist
destination that's gonna drive it.
That's all.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, anyone
else?
Uh, Rosemary DeAngelis, Pleasant Dale.
Um, as you can see, I, the, the, while I
also serve on the Bicycle Pedestrian Committee, we did not take a position on this
because the committee was very divided.
And, so I support what the last several speakers
have said. I also don't support this
program, for a number of reasons, and some
of them Leah already raised. But I think,
m- safety is certainly one. No access to
maps, infrastructure, those are all issues that concern
me. I think, I also have concern
about people being responsible for bikes.
And, and the, the reason there are a lot of
bikes already in the basement of the police department is because
people have just abandoned them. And I just see this
as, a national company coming
in where anybody can pick up a bike.
First of all, they're very expensive based on the rates that were given to
us at the Bicycle Pedestrian Committee.
Uh, it's, they're expensive to use.
So they're not going to be attracting regular use by
residents for, from what I can see.
Um,
I, I think that it's been said by a number of people, $20,000
is a lot of money, and again, is this the best way
that we want to spend it when, when we, when we
are, as, Counselor Matthew said, we're in a budget
crisis? Things are not, um... Yeah,
th- we're not in a good place. I think the helmet giveaway,
is, is a, is
I, I could use the term it is a giveaway.
Um, it, it's just sort of a silly idea.
You know, is somebody gonna go and get a helmet and then carry it around with
them for when they're gonna use their bike share?
You know, they're gonna be, "Oh, I'm really glad I got my helmet here.
You know, I can now r- rent a b-" I mean, it just, like, it makes
no sense to me. The other thing that concerns me is, aside from the
visual clutter, even though you've never been to my house, um-
The, the-- first of all, asking-- if you ask for the
inclusion, they're asking for the inclusion of e-bikes.
If you do that, the next item that's up on the agenda that we've been waiting for
since six o'clock, um-
Six-thirty
... you're gonna have to make a change, because if you're going to
include e-bikes in this, then you have to be
looking at... Because e-bikes right now are not allowed on our
greenbelt, on our walkway. Um,
but the, the, last thing is the issue of advertising, and I know I'm ri-
gonna run out of time, but the issue of advertising, like we have no control over
who advertises on these bikes. Is it even product or things
that we care about or that we want? I mean w-what, what's
going to be the outcome of the,
of the result of the, of advertising wh- that could be
products that we just absolutely oppose? Thank you.
Thank you. Let the record reflect that the meeting started at
six-thirty.
Yeah, six-thirty. I'm sorry.
Um Please.
I was good.
Council, this is Jeff Steinburn, Cottage Road.
Uh, my bike has been hanging upside down in
our garage since last November when I had to put it
away. Uh, and a day like today makes me think this is
about the time to put that bike back on its feet and get on
it myself. So I've got a lot of say about bikes in South
Portland, and I really appreciate the three minutes that I get to
do it. Um,
but I know those three minutes are not gonna contain me altogether.
As somebody who sits in this audience quite frequently, I often have
things I'd like to sing out that I think you need to hear, and
I just want to advise you against encouraging that kind of behavior
among those of, of those of us in the audience because it will
lead to a kind of madness.
All right. Let's stick to the topic.
Well, the three minutes dwindling now.
Um,
South Portland is a wonderful place to do a lot of things,
but it's not a wonderful place to be on a bike,
with some exceptions. And so I,
I join
my fellow citizens in saying,
although it's hard not to be sympathetic to the idea of getting more people
on bikes and making people, making bikes more available to
lots of people, we really shouldn't do that, it
seems to me, until we can feel more confident about
where it is we're asking them or allowing them to bike.
My Aunt LaVerne was a terrible cook- ...
but every once in a while we had to go to a picnic or a party at my Aunt
LaVerne's house, and then you had to put up with my Aunt LaVerne's cooking.
But the last thing you'd wanna do is to encourage a lot of other
people- ... to partake of that cooking because it just
wasn't good. It wasn't
good. And I think there's a kind of analogy there.
And then when we hear that in Maine you don't have to wear a
helmet, I didn't even know that-
I didn't either
... and that
the people in bike share are even less likely than the rest of us
to have helmets or to use helmets, that just seems
like, a further foolishness. So
sympathetic though I may be, and altogether interested in this topic though
I am, and sure though I am that I will have further things to say that I
haven't thought of now when you're discussing-
Thirty seconds
... but I'll not say them because sometimes the epitome of being a good citizen is
knowing when to keep your mouth shut. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else?
Okay. Public comment on the bike share item is
closed. Um, we have been asked to answer some
questions here. Counselors-
Have some... Yeah.
Oh, we also did have questions that were asked.
Yeah. So, Julian and, Megan, m-might need your
help with some of these. The first question was, "How does someone get from their
home to one of these locations to make it
worthwhile to use the bikes instead of their vehicle?"
Yeah. I mean, at-- that's a really good question.
It's, it's where we site them. Hopefully what we're doing is we're,
s-starting to site them in places where people can walk out their door
and use the bike, the bikes, not drive to a place to use the
bike. That feels insane. That feels
insane, and that's not what we envisioned.
So, this i- the whole idea of bike
share is first and last mile, transportation gaps, transportation
infrastructure. Um,
I've, I've given the example of SMCC.
Uh, it's, you know, a quick trip from SMCC to,
you know, downtown Mill Creek area across the
bridge just out to, Portland, would be made so much
easier, would be so much more accessible for students.
For where there's clusters of people that are living that can walk out their door
and, borrow a bike from one station and bring it to another station.
That's what we envision.
There's a question about do you need insurance? No.
Just like if you own your own bike, there's no insurance required to ride,
a bike. And then the last thing was about infrastructure, who
pays for it. If you wanna help a little with this, obviously the city pays for any
sort of infrastructure. We maybe wanna talk a little bit about our Complete Streets
policy-
Yeah, absolutely
... that does already say that when we rebuild roads-
Yep
... that we are gonna invest or we should invest in bike infrastructure, so
that's gonna happen regardless.
Yeah, absolutely. Well, there's two points that I wanna make so quick,
probably less than sixteen minutes and thirty-two seconds, so quick.
Okay. The first point is, is that this is not
either/or, or, or at least I don't see this as either/or.
We need bikes, and we need bike infrastructure.
And if we're saying we wanna support bike shops, then we're saying that
we wanna support bikes in South Portland.Again, I just don't see this
as sort of more of a touristy thing.
I see this as a transportation,
project. So we
have the complete streets. We have a complete streets policy, and then we
got grant funding a couple of years ago to do a whole complete streets design
manual. Um, we've done-- we've created-- we got another grant to
do, a
neighborhood byway, for the-- to the new middle school, and we
rolled that out last year, and we're gonna roll it out as another sort of spring
rollout again, this year. So complete
streets, neighborhood byways, obviously,
you know, hundred and twenty thousand dollars wouldn't get you very
far on streets and sidewalks. It's a both/and that we
have to make these infrastructure investments.
And now I wanna just talk about the funding part.
Um, we submitted this project. PACS asked for
what are the transportation priorities from, from all of the PACS
members. The City of South Portland submitted projects.
So we submitted, a project, um...
We submitted infrastructure projects.
We submi-- specifically one that's in there and scored,
pretty high but not as high as a bike share program was, expanding
sidewalk access on Broadway between Church and,
Lincoln. Between Church and Lincoln.
Um, widening the Greenbelt, that's another project we submitted.
So we submitted all of these infrastru--
transportation infrastructure projects, and then Maine DOT and PACS
scores the projects. And bike share scored, rather high
on these, on, on, on the list. And so,
I think I also mentioned, yes, this is one year.
There is the potential, I talked to, somebody at,
GPCOG. You know, like I've mentioned, three hundred thousand dollars made
it into the PACS list, and I think if we, did this
pilot for one year and we said, "Yeah, we wanna keep going with it," that we
would potentially maintain access to that money.
If you don't wanna do bike share, there isn't any
other use that we can use that hundred, that hundred K for.
So, so it would be, you know, not
applying the twenty thousand dollars, but the hundred thousand dollars that's sort
of earmarked now for this program would just go back to the state.
It wouldn't even go to other PACS projects.
Or actually three hundred thousand that's allocated to it.
So I just wanna be clear about that and say, I-- this is not a
silver bullet. I mean, it's not. But the point is, is that it's
trying to get people to fill in our tran-our transit
infrastructure that we know is trying to do a better job of being more
frequent, being, you know, more accessible to people, and so this is
another way that we thought of doing it.
There's no doubt that we need to improve our roads,
absolutely. But I don't see it as an either/or,
I see it as a both/and.
Um, I might just add one, small point, is that in
looking at-
Excuse me for just one second.
Oh.
Are you adding because we're answering questions?
Yes? Okay.
It's, it's in the same question.
Go ahead. Thank you.
The infrastructure, the, the roads, yeah.
Thank you.
Correct.
Okay.
Yes. Um, so in looking at the experience of other
cities that have implemented bike share, this is a very
common perpetual issue. Do we do infrastructure first?
Do we do bike share first? Um, and what the experience
shows is that they, they
really should move forward with bike share alongside, so they're
synergistic. So the more people use bike share, the more you have people
biking, the more people who are interested in those infrastructure
investments, the better it gets for everybody.
Um, visibility increases, and, and you just have a
more, sound rationale for continuing those investments.
So South Portland is not alone in, thinking
about their infrastructure and which should come first.
Um, but the experience that has been borne out is that, as Julie said,
it does not need to be an either/or.
It should be a both/and.
There was a question, too, about the funding, in future years.
I think you had a slide that said twenty percent from,
fees and membership, sixty firs-percent from sponsorship,
advertising, and then twenty percent would come from the community.
Is that what Portland's model is? And, and, and so it, so it wouldn't be
the full hundred and twenty that would fall on the city, it would be twenty percent
or twenty-four of that annually. Is that correct?
Correct. That's the estimate we've been provided, based on the model and
looking at the size of our city.
All right. And then the last question was what about if there's advertising
that this private company puts on the bikes that, they don't like?
Do we have any way to restrict that?
I don't know as a government if we can restrict,
someone's speech in that manner, but has Portland had any examples where they've
said, "Oh, what's this doing on a bike?" Or are you aware of that?
Um, yeah. So, in our experience, s- Portland has been
an active partner in recruiting their sponsors, that have
advertisements on the bikes. Um, you've probably seen the Harvard
Pilgrim insignia on some of their bikes, in the past.
Um, so, so they did play an active role in, you know,
identifying and, and working to, secure those
sponsorships. Um, I don't see a reason why we couldn't,
in, in terms of the system design, say that,
South Portland reserves the right, to,
accept, whatever sponsorship,
we, we define. So, that would be something to explore
further, but it could potentially be something we include in the
ordinance.
Okay. I think those are all the questions, ma'am.
All right. Thank you very much. Um, now it is the
council's turn to
answers to
the questions.
So, are we, Councilor West, would you like to
go first?
Um, sure. Are you interested in pursuing a bike share program?
My answer is no. And I'll give, I think I have
about five main reasons. This first came up about three years
ago, and at the time, because I have my own personal experience with some of these
programs, I was opposed to it because I know the
burden that it puts on the Public Works Department.
I have seen what happens when you have the bikes that are left
behind, the bikes that are just abandoned, and the Public Works Department ends up
picking them up, taking them. It's, it falls on their shoulders.
And we all know that our Public Works Department's already working at
capacity. I'm very proud of what they do, but they do a lot with a lean
staff. At the time, I was on a trip in Seattle, and I
actually took some photos of the bikes in the, in the, creating the
hazards to the pedestrians, where people just leave them and all that stuff.
And then I thought this issue had gone away, and I deleted them, so I can't
entertain you tonight with those interesting photos.
But I, that's, that was my first reason.
Then the second reason that I think we have to really look at seriously tonight,
South Portland just does not have the right design as a city for a
bike share program to be effective. It's too spread out.
And an indication of that is that this bike share p- these bike share
entities want us to pay. $100,000 plus
$20,000 to get us eight stations with 40 bikes
is $3,000 a bicycle. And when you look at the
cities where bike shares are successful, it's a
revenue generator for the city. I wrote down a couple of
the ones. In, in Boise, Idaho, under the recent
agreement, they, the bike share company pays an annual
contract fee of $100,000 along with 10 cents a trip.
The company also pays $106 fee for every device that needs to
be moved or removed dur- due to a complaint.
In Baltimore, a permit lasts for one year and costs $70,000.
The companies pay 10 cents per ride per
vehicle and hun- and $10,000 each year in performance
bonds for damage and all that stuff.
And there's also other kinds of charges.
In, in, Oakland, California, they an- they
pay a non-refundable permit fee of $2,500
plus an annual $30,000 fee, a vehicle fee of
$64 per bicycle per year, and then all kinds of other fees for
the abandonment and everything else. Where a bike...
And I, and I could go on, because it's universal.
Where a bike share program is supposed to work, where it can
work, it doesn't cost the city money.
And w- and for us, with as tight as we are, I would just urge
us to do everything we can to get that $100,000
reallocated for hardscape. Uh, I think everybody on the council
knows, and you'll hear later tonight, upgrading the
Greenbelt is, if I could accomplish one thing in my years as a
councilor, it would be that that Greenbelt would be upgraded to
multi-path standards. I, it is so key, and it would make such a
difference in our community if we could.
Um, then I, I am concerned about business and about conflicting
with a local business that's made a major commitment in our community.
And I wanna share something with you.
I, doing my research, I came across a, a really super great
article to me that said, "Bike share should have been the biggest
transformation in inclusive urban transport to date, except
it wasn't. Analysis of schemes over the last decade end-
exhibit that users are disproportionately young, male,
white, highly educated, and from higher income groups.
These are disappointing statistics, to put it mildly, especially given the
clear potential for sharing programs to expand mobility options for
those with barriers to owning a bike.
Instead, it has been community bike shops which have been transforming
access to cycling for low-income communities, people of
color, and less represented gender identities.
These are not your traditional cycle retail outlets.
Offering low cost and free mechanics workshops, traffic navigation
training, free repairs, donations of bikes, parts, and
accessories, these have engaged low-income and diverse communities in
cycling." And that's the kind of thing that I do think we can do in our
community. I think we have a bike p- a bike shop here that's trying to do
it. It's more appropriate for what we're, we have in South
Portland. I, too, am very concerned about a nation- national
company coming in and doing the business.
When you do the studies, the, the major ones are actually
spin-offs from Lyft and Uber and all that.
And,
then... And then again, the, they were just
not designed for, with the, with the hardscape.
So that's my quick, trying to have a quick rundown, not take too much
time, of the reasons why I will not support a bike share
program.
Thank you, Councilor West. Anyone wanna go next?
Councilor Scott, thank you.
I'm happy to go next, and I, I will be brief.
Um, I don't think that this is the right time to
have a bike share program. I would hope that there is some point in our future,
maybe with a comprehensive plan , that a bike share might be an
appropriate use in various areas of the city, but I just don't think we're there
yet. And I don't know that it's the right money for us to spend at this
time. I've personally found it to be a disaster in all
the places that I have visited with bike shares, and I
really love the sort of Amsterdam-type bike
community that's there and would love to build more of that in South Portland,
which I think is more about infrastructure and bike
ownership. Um, so I, I very much appreciate the work and the thought around
this. I very much appreciate that it is sort of a big box that is
part of, you know, moving forward into a kind of
greener and less carbon-basedUh,
economy and culture, but I just...
I don't think it's right for South Portland at this time, and very much appreciate,
what Lighthouse Bikes has, has done in our community, and, and would love to
support more businesses like that.
Thank you, Councilor Scott. Who wants to go next? Councilor Matthews. Thank you.
Julie, I got that 16 minute and 32 second remark.
Um,
I'm gonna be brie- briefer than, Councilor Scott.
Uh, I am just going to say that I'm not going to support this at this
time. Uh, I'm going to support, local business
instead.
Thank you, Councilor Matthews. Councilor Pride.
Um, I thought about this a lot when I was reading the memos, and it was a
great presentation. Thank you so much, Julie, and everyone on
the, who worked on it. Um, I
am, not in favor of this. The thing
that... And, and Councilor West touched on it, that was sort of the,
that drove me in that direction initially was, along with public
comment, was the, the, the shape and size of our
city. You know, we're in city hall right over here, Mill Creek area, but then
there's Main Street, and it's way over there. And then there's the mall.
I mean, these are the places people congregate and maybe where all the bikes end
up. I don't know. But, I... it just doesn't feel like,
it's, it's for us. Um, a- and maybe,
maybe there's a point in the future when we, when we do,
widen the Greenbelt and we do, create the
infrastructure that, that it could possibly be something that's successful, but
I, I, I don't know. You know? But I'm not for it now. Thanks.
Thank you. Um, we have two more councilors left who haven't
spoken.
Oh, I will speak now. It's just financially not the right time
for even consideration of bike share.
Um, and I was an avid
cyclist, until, ugh, well,
I, I s- I sold my mountain bike shortly after I, after a
few years after I lived here, 'cause it just was really scary.
I would go to, I would go to Portland
Head Light and do a single trail by Goddard Mansion.
But, uh... and I... my dream was when I retired to get with a
basket and everything. It's too scary.
I mean, e- even being a pedestrian, I'm a cautious
pedestrian in this city, and it's because of the
infrastructure. So I'm, I'm... Yeah, I
know, you know, chicken and egg kind of thing, but I'm
not a bike rider i- in the city. And I have a friend who was
a bicycle messenger in Boston, and he puts his
bicycle in his pickup truck and goes out of the city and
rides in the country.
Good for him.
Yes, he does.
All right. Thank you. Councilor Walker, would you like to
speak?
Yes. Um, I probably will be shouting to the void since I might
be the, the alone voice to say that I do support this.
Um, I think that
this is a chance that while we're in an incredibly
tight fiscal situation, and I appreciate the point
that Councilor Matthews made before about how it is, it is
probably more dire than a lot of people realize in terms of where we are
financially. I feel like this is a, a rare opportunity we
have to be aspirational with little cost
to our taxpayers. Um, I think that a $20,000
investment to do something for a one-year pilot that could
have a major difference in access to our city is
huge, and I appreciate all of the work that, the sustainability
department did on this. I do hear the concerns that my fellow councilors
hear. Um, I, I don't see this... I thought Julie said it perfectly when
she said it was a both and. I don't see this as a weaponization
against our small business. I see this as a symbiotic
opportunity where it might get more people on bikes, therefore getting more people
to realize they want to purchase bikes and go to our small businesses
to do so. Um, and oft... You know, my, one of my questions I was gonna have
if we did move forward with this was whether we could put some sort
of stipulation where we did use our small business to
provide the ongoing maintenance, therefore creating financial opportunity for
that business as well, but that is a moot point.
So I do think this is a responsible way to go about something that is,
in meeting both our council goal, one of our
council goals, and also our One Climate Future goals, but I will
respect the will of the council.
Thank you, Councilor Walker. Um,
it, it does seem that we are, that the council's saying no.
Um,
I will just say that I,
I love biking. And yes, it can be challenging to
ride in South Portland. The Greenbelt is a
spectacular place to ride, even if it isn't that wide.
Um, but the re- When, when you ride in traffic, you must kind of learn
how, and that's what happens in South Portland.
I just... I guess what I'm... I don't know.
I think I'm more Team Walker than I, than I am with the others
because I do wish we could try some experiments like this.
I don't think that, anyone...
I, with all due respect, I don't think that, the private
business would be harmed. I do think it could be more symbiotic.
Um, it doesn't look like council is going to say that.
I just wanted to, for the record, I...
Councilor, Councilor West, you are
absolutely right. The figure that you gave, if you include the 100,000
per bike, is the right math. But that isn't what the q- residents would
be paying. That figure is 625 per bike over the year, which makes it
52 a month per bike. So I j- Yeah.
It's all public money.
Yeah.
It's all public dollars. I think we have to say we
cannot... It comes from the taxpayers, whether it's-
Our particular or whatever. If we could get that hundred thousand dollars
and use it to do some little bit of the Greenbelt-
I-
... that would be-
Yes
... outstanding.
We, we would because we're not gonna be Amsterdam or Copenhagen any time
soon, and that's gonna be a cost of millions of dollars.
I think we've come to the end of the workshop.
Yes, we've answered the questions, and I think we're
moving on. Um,
I can see what time it is. It's 9:35.
We wanna do e-bikes, but if anyone feels like they just wanna
stand up, please don't rush out of the room.
I need to stand up. This is me standing, stretching just a
little bit.
We can make e-bikes fast.
Mm-hmm.
Yes, I think it would be. All right.
Nothing moves as fast.
What?
Nothing moves
as fast.
Oh, I love
Well, if you have ideas for changing that, I would certainly love to hear them.
I was going to tell you later.
It's like a new thing for me.
Really?
Yeah.
And I like them with a wide leg.
Not very appreciated.
All right. Can we get going with our e-bikes discussion?
Who's leading us off?
So,
so tonight, council's being asked, it's kind of a combined,
workshop topic on e-bikes on the Greenbelt and bikes on sidewalks.
So the ultimate question,
to councilors will be whether or not to allow, e-bikes on the
Greenbelt, and it's a little bit more nuanced than that, but then two, whether or
not to allow, bicycles on city sidewalks.
And so tonight for the e-bikes portion of this, you're gonna hear from,
the chair of the Bike Ped Committee, as they were the ones that
initiated this workshop request that you all, accepted to add to the
agenda. So you'll hear from Rosemary DeAngelis a little bit about, the
rationale for why, this was added, and then you'll also
hear from, some folks on, from our
park staff to talk a little bit about some of the surveying they've done and some
of the observations they've done, in the past
related to this topic. So, I've got a few things to say, but I'm gonna turn it
over first to Rosemary.
Thank you. Uh, Rosemary DeAngelis, chair of Bike Ped, and I want
to say that there are three committee members who are here, Jeff
Woodbury-
Councilors, councilors
... who's over here, Carl Eppig, and Sam
Merrill, all three members of the Bicycle Pedestrian
Committee, and, I, I believe at least one of them is
gonna have a couple things to say when I'm finished.
But I wanna thank the council first for holding this workshop tonight, and I will
be brief. I have no fancy slides with regards to this
topic, but I'm hopeful that your discussion and debate will resolve
most of the issues, and I'm also happy to answer any questions.
Uh, the South Portland Bicycle Pedestrian Committee took a position to support the
use of electric bikes ranked one and two to be allowed on
the Greenbelt multi-use path, and our recommendation is
supported by the following reasons.
First and foremost,
we see the increased use of e-bikes as a positive thing for reasons
that include allowing greater access, increasing maintaining
and physical activity, decrease in auto emissions,
greater sociability, and supporting physical activity for aging
populations to name but a few. The state de- the
second is, the state definition referring to all bicycles
as devices supports the use of e-bikes and
encourages communities to do the same.
Third, e-bikes are allowed on Portland, Scarborough, and
Cape Elizabeth multi-use paths, and to my knowledge, all other
sections of the Eastern Trail. To prohibit them
here is to expect the folks will ride through
Portland, get off their bike, and walk through South Portland, and
get back on when they reach Scarborough.
To not do that would mean breaking the law.
The former is unlikely, and the latter is not known to
most e-bike owners. Fourth,
one of the missions of the Bicycle Pedestrian Committee is to support
and encourage and teach responsible use of bicycles as
well as providing education for pedestrians.
On August 16th this past year, the Bicycle Pedestrian Committee
conducted its first Greenbelt Education Day
lasting about five hours, and during that time, we encountered
many e-bike riders on the Greenbelt.
All were using their bikes responsibly, and none were aware that
they were not allowed.
Fifth, we've had two opportunities to
demonstrate safe use of e-bikes on
our Greenbelt, yet we've been unable to do that given the present
interpretation of our ordinance.
So we've been prohibited from helping to educate and
teach people better ways to, and ways to be
responsible bike riders and bike owners because we, we
can't promote the use of e-bikes on our
Greenbelt. Sixth, the police department has been clear
that it really cannot enforce the ordinance for a variety of
reasons, including the lack of needed staff to do this.
I mean, you would need to have police officers on
bicycles going up and down the Greenbelt, being able to
identify e-bikes one and two or three or
any e-bikes, and be able to identify that the bike is
actually not in, or is in electric use
mode because if it's not in electric use mode, then it's not a
violation. Um, and, anyway.
So, so given that, it makes no sense to have
an ordinance that cannot be enforced.
So I, we hope that this council will adjust the ordinance and allow
e-bikes one and two on the Greenbelt.
This committee is prepared to help in any way considered
appropriate. Um, standing by for your
direction.I'm prepared to an- answer any questions as
well. And I have things to say about bikes on the
sidewalk, but I will wait until we talk about e-bikes here.
And I don't know if, Carl or Jeff or
Sam have anything they wanna add before,
before... Okay, come on up. So, so
this is, Sam Merrill on the Bike
Ped.
Sam Merrill, Bike Ped Committee. I live on Sawyer Street.
Um, being on wheels a lot of the time, and that- that's
some of the things I contribute to the committee, is, I, I get
my, my exercise on a hand cycle. And I'll go out
about an hour, an hour and a half, have for, since, I don't know, 20
years. And I used a, a hand cycle with no pedal
assist for, until 2022.
And once I got pedal assist, I'll tell you, the world opened up quite a
lot. It's flattened hills. I could go farther in the
same hour and a half of exercise. I can go
with a, with a moderate speed, tolerable on
standard Greenbelt traffic, all the way to Rainright and back
in just under two hours. So
that's, that changed my life-
Wow
... being able to do that as a disabled person.
So I would say if I, if we don't do this, then I can't do
that. Thanks.
Thank you, Sam.
Thank you.
Um, Carl or Jeff?
Jeff.
Jeff, come on up.
This was really an impromptu preparation here for this .
Hi. Jeff Woodbury, Hobart Street.
Um, I'm in favor of allowing all e-bikes
on the Greenbelt, class one, two, and
three, for a number of reasons.
The logic of stopping it... If you're not aware, class one
and two max out at 20 miles an hour. Class three can go to
28 miles an hour.
Now, the logic of keeping a class three off the
Greenbelt is the same logic, how do you
play that into my vehicle, which I'm limited to 35 miles an hour on
the road, but my car can go 120.
As Rosemary said, if my bike's not turned on, it's a
regular bike. You cannot enforce that.
Don't make law you cannot enforce.
If you're worried about speed, a regular bicyclist goes about 15 miles an
hour. If you've been on the Greenbelt, the fastest people on bikes are people
wearing Spandex and toe clips-
Yeah
... on a regular bike. They're the ones that frighten
me. Um,
if you're worried about weight, my bicycle and I weigh 220
pounds. If I got on a tandem bike with my girlfriend, that would be
pounds.
Um,
fitness rider. The most important reason
is because of the infrastructure of South
Portland. I got my girlfriend an e-bike because
she loves to bike. She is terrified of Broadway.
As soon as she can get to the Greenbelt, she loves it.
I've seen more older folks on e-bikes than anywhere.
And speaking of the sidewalk, if
you've ever been to Cash Corner, everybody pulls to the right to let the people
turn left, and they're-- I'm either waiting behind 20 cars, or I'm on the
sidewalk. So guess where I am? I'm on the sidewalk.
Um, I really don't see any
good reason to ban e-bikes. And if you tell me the Greenbelt's not wide
enough, you know what? We can be careful.
We are careful. We have our squeaky horns, our bells.
We slow down when people are there, when kids are there, strollers are
there, other people are there. We can do that, just like we do on the roads.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Oops.
So thank you, and I'm going to introduce, Sydney Raftery
to come up and speak about... Uh, Sydney has b-
presented to the, Bicycle Pedestrian Committee a couple of times
and has done some surveys that I think are helpful
and insightful, and I'm gonna turn it over to her.
Thank you. Hello, Council. My name is Sydney Raftery.
I'm the park ranger for the city. Um, this is just a recap
of some of the surveys that we have done and that I have presented to some of you
in the past and presented to Bike Ped Committee.
Um, in 2022, we started these surveys.
We only got to do them in October of that year, based on when we were
asked. And then in 2023, we spent 60
hours collecting data between June and September.
2024, 104 hours, on the Greenbelt collecting
data. Um, I can tell you more about our methods if you
want, but I'm gonna skip that part, unless you have questions, to get
to the points. Um, so looking at those two years that we were able to collect
data for the whole season, here are some of our findings.
Of the 5,015 users that we counted over those two
years, 43% were using pedal bikes and
7% were using e-bikes. The average speed
of the pedal bikes was 9.25 miles per hour, and
e-bikes was 10.15, so within one mile an hour
of each other. The percentage of e-bikes going at
an excessive, excessive speed, which I chose 15
miles an hour 'cause that's what looked fast to me- ...
was more than the percentage of pedal bikes going over 15 miles per
hour. But that being said, with how many of each there were,
the instances of pedal bikes was a lot more, with
44 pedal bikes and only 20 e-bikes going over 15 miles an
hour.Um, all bikes, electric and pedal, tend to slow down
when there are more people present or when the path is narrower.
Um, just makes sense. And then all bikes do need work on
signaling, although we do find that people signal if someone is blocking their
way. Um, so that in addition to the fact that the Parks Department
only receives about one complaint per year about
e-bikes, leads us to support this proposition.
Thank you.
Uh, I wanted to say just a couple other things, and that's that,
to our knowledge, there has not been any...
there have not been any reports of accidents that have been caused
b- with, with or by e-bikes,
over the past couple years. Um, secondly, I wanted
to acknowledge, Sam Merrill's contribution,
tonight and that, that his insight
and his own perspective and experience has really
lended itself to giving the Bicycle Pedestrian Committee
a broader view and a better understanding of w-
what are the populations, who are the people we're trying to
encourage to be out and getting exercise, and that's
everyone, and, Sam helps us to keep that in
mind at all times. So I'm happy to answer any questions if anybody
has any.
Okay, so that's the end of the information. All right.
I do have, have... Yeah.
You have information as well.
Yeah. So I just, 'cause I know at least three of the councilors weren't here
and some members of the public, the last time this was discussed, so I just
briefly wanna remind folks, back on April 18th, the city council,
staff did bring forward an ordinance proposal that would've explicitly allowed
e-bikes, on the Greenbelt, and the council did pass the first read.
When it got to second reads, concerns were raised about the width of the
Greenbelt not being to AASHTO standards, and so the
council, withdrew that item from the agenda,
wi- with the intent of taking it up after such a time the city
could find out a little bit more about how we could widen the Greenbelt and how
much that would cost. And so since that time, we have done, an
in-house assessment of the Greenbelt to talk about areas, where it
might not meet, proper lengths and, and things of, of
that nature. The next step after we've completed this first step is
to, secure funding for an inspection of the Anthoine
Bridge and to begin preliminary design work.
That's gonna cost about $200,000.
Um, w- the funding for the entire project right now, including construction, is
estimated to be at about 6.5 million.
So we are looking at grants, have applied for grants, will continue to,
but that's where we stand on that.
Um,
obviously Bike Ped, in October as w- as Chair
DeAngelis had indicated, asked you all to bring this up
despite, the work not being done on, on the Greenbelt.
Council, said okay. Um, the solution this
time, as opposed to last time where the language was we explicitly
allow e-bikes, is to mirror the state law
definition, right? And so that's what you'll see in the proposed ordinance
amendments, is that, the, the proposal would be to
have our ordinance simply refer to state law when talking
about bicycles, and essentially that includes e-bikes
and, and state law does say Class One and Two.
State law prohibits Class Three, on trails, so it's,
it's, and this... if you wanna mirror state law, it's Class One and Two
only. Um, practical as that may not be, but, but that's
how state law reads. Um, and so again,
the staff continue to support this update, and, y-
I, we probably just wanna stop here and talk about e-bikes on Greenbelt versus
sidewalks at this point, I'm assuming.
That seemed to be how our workshop, presenters had
planned.
Okay.
So councilors, thank you very much, Scott.
Councilors, do you have questions of our presenters or
questions of Scott? Councilor Scott.
I have two hopefully quick questions.
Thank you very much.
If we were to mirror the state, and apologies if this is in
here somewhere, if we were to mirror the state law and not include Class
Three, or sorry, if we were to include Class Three in our allowance of e-bikes
on the Greenbelt, does that prevent us or,
put us in jeopardy of any sort of state funding or
other grant opportunities for widening the Greenbelt?
Not that I'm aware of.
Okay.
I, I couldn't say that for a fact, but I don't, I don't know if the st- I haven't
seen anything that where the state has precluded.
I don't know if anyone, has more expertise than me on the matter,
sir, otherwise, but, uh...
Carlo Pick again, Pine Street.
I, I don't know the answer to that question, but it would, might be worth
passing something that's consistent with state law and,
or doing the research to find out prior.
Um, I wouldn't let that slow you down, you know?
Yeah.
That's, that's what I'm saying.
A- and then the other question, I just wanna confirm, th- the question before us is
not, or allowing e-bikes on the Greenbelt is not
dependent on this widening project.
This, we can do that, and then the widening project is a totally
separate consideration. Just wanna confirm that.
Y- you don't have to. The, the prior council's guidance was we should widen it
first before we, before we take any sort of
action. Um, but you do not have to.
Yeah. No.
There's, there's no, like, legal liability.
No. No, no. Okay. Good. I'm good. Let's go.
I guess I have a... Well, do you guys have
questions? Questions, questions.
I have clarification.
I, yes. So do I, but go with yours.
'Cause I've been pretty involved with this.
The state law
allows Class One and Class Two bicycles if you
allow bicycles. It got really mixed up before,
and what we've tried to do now is have these sections mirror
the provisions of state law.
So the way it works is if you ride a, if you're on a bicycle,
it can be a bicycle, pedal bicycle, it can be a Class 1 bicycle, it can
be a Class 2 bicycle. Class 3 bicycles are, electric
bikes are not, are, are restricted unless you expressly allow
them.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay, any other questions?
S- I got one for Scott. Scott, does Portland Pipeline
have any say in any of the widening we do on the Greenbelt, considering they're the
owners of the Greenbelt?
For, for portions that we lease, they're...
Not just from the pipeline, but we also lease it from,
uh... There's a portion we lease from another,
location, so, that would be part of it. We'd have to get their permission.
So, but I know. But what I'm saying is we're making it sound like we can just go
ahead and widen the Greenbelt.
Yep.
We have a lot of loops and stipulations to go through-
Yep
... to be able to do that.
Yep, we do. We have to get-
Right
... permission-
Yes
... and things. And, and even, even on portions we own, if we're gonna encroach on
people's properties, we'd have to get that, you know.
Right.
That's why it's not a really straightforward
project.
Okay. Any other council questions before we go to public comment?
I do not see any. Public comment is open on this item.
We have no public comment on this item.
Public comment-
No, this is, uh-
... is about to close, but I will give you time to approach that podium.
Pardon?
I... Thank you. Go ahead.
Oh, okay. Yeah. Phil Weinberg, Por- Parrot Street.
Um,
to me,
Class 2, Class 3, it doesn't matter.
I have a Class 2 bike, and, 'cause Class
3 is too, too fast for me, and nobody's gonna d- ride,
a Class 28 miles an hour on the Greenbelt.
That, that isn't g- gonna happen, so to me
it, it doesn't really matter. I- if it's more
convenient to go with the, state
regulations, that's fine, I think, either way.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else on this
topic?
Charlie Teamy, Pleasantdale. I
was just wondering if, there's any s-
liability, questions in
this. Um,
you know, people break the law all the time, or I do
anyways.
Not
since Pullman.
Uh, and, and I think,
you know, there's counselors
that have seen me actually riding m- my bike on the s-
sidewalk. Uh, but, you
know, if... Is the city
res- ultimately responsible if it'll, if, that it
s- has to have infrastructure to support these speeds
on these paths? Uh, so if you allow
it, does that mean you're responsible for it?
And if you disallow it and something happens, are you off the
hook? I-
Mm
... I'm just curious. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have... Um, come on
down.
One last comment. Jeff Woodbury again.
Um,
he makes a good point, the gentleman behind me.
have you seen the condition of our Greenbelt?
Trying to drive 28 miles an hour on that is insane.
So if you widen it and make it nice and smooth, you're
encouraging more dangerous riding than just leaving it alone and allowing all
the bikes. Thank you.
Okay. I'll remember you the next time I bounce over those
roots.
Um, anyone else, public comment?
All right. Public comment on this item is closed, and Scott, I think we have some
questions.
So the, the question, only, only question I had w- heard was, about
liability. Um, and so n- no, if the state, if the city
adopts the state's definition, there's no added liability that, that
comes from that.
Um, actually, I realize that... Thank you very much, Scott. Thank you.
I realize I'm closing public comment, but the item also
includes bikes on sidewalks, so we haven't discussed that yet, so I think
that, that we... It's not officially closed.
Sorry about that, folks. Um, but we'll open it back
up when we get to that. Anyway, now
councilors. Um, I think you could either discuss
this now, or we could hear the presentation about bicycles on city
sidewalks. Councilor Walker.
I think we should finish this, and then we can just move forward cleanly.
Just... Okay. Can we hear your information about bicyc-
About.
Well, wait a minute.
Oh.
Oh, this is.
Yeah.
Sorry. I thought you meant this as the whole topic.
No.
All right. Well, Councilor Walker, would you like to say something about this?
Yeah, absolutely. Um, as an avid pedal biker myself, and
someone who is on the Greenbelt often in those five lovely months that we have to
ride, I'm not brave enough to ride in the winter.
But, I see people on e-bikes all of the time, and I
think it only makes sense to, in the spirit of
encouraging access and getting more people on bikes and stretching the ability
of people to bike longer and further in, and with increased
ability, we should mirror the state law
and allow Class 1 and Class 2 on the Greenbelt.
Thank you very much.
Mm-hmm.
Councilor Scott.
Um, I'm definitely in favor of allowing e-bikes on the Greenbelt, and I
think I don't see an
enforcement, or an enforcement option,
or a sort of clear distinction of not allowing Class 3
as a distinct e-bike type than Class 2.
I wanted to clarify, Scott, when you said, "We don't have any liability,"
I think you said as long as we follow sort of the state definitions.
No, I, I-
But you didn't mean-
Even if we allowed-
... 2 versus 3
... if you, if you allowed Class 3, there's not, you know-
Yeah
... the city's not liable for-
Okay
... if a, if a Greenbelt's not 10 feet wide. That's just an AASHTO standard.
It's not a state law requirement.
Okay. I, I would be in favor of allowing sort of-
Type one, two, three e-bikes on the green
belt. Um...
Okay. Thank you. Um, I'm seeing it this side.
Well-
I just-
All right, you had one more question or a comment?
I just wanted to amend my thing to say that I would support that as well.
So you are one, two, three people. All right, councilor-
Can I, can I add complexity?
What?
Um, the way we had worked it out was to,
we don't sp- specify the green belt in here.
We just say,
it, it'll have to... These, these ordinances that are ready to go really
are that bicycle is defined this way, then
it's that,
you know, bicycles can go on all
parks.
It's kinda gonna have to go back to the drawing board a little bit if you wanna
separate out the green belt and say that class three is allowed on the green
belt.
Because if you look at, it's
18, if you wanna look at it, it's 18-8, no person
shall operate any blah, blah, blah-
Mm
... and class three bicycle on any,
city park.
And so it's just, if you, uh...
And it's fine if that's what people wanna do.
Let's just give directions to the corporation counsel that he
needs to make some changes
so that it expressly says class three
e-bike on the green belt.
Is this also coming back as an order?
Ordinance.
Yes.
Okay.
It's three, three different chapters-
Yeah
... need to be amended.
Right.
Yep.
4, 15, and 18.
Okay. Anyone else on this side have comments?
Yes, Councilor Pride.
I'm in favor of, matching the state
law.
So you're a one and two.
I am.
All right. Councilor Matthews, you think you're a-
I'll go with the state too, one and two, because it doesn't really matter anyway.
We can't enforce it. There's not gonna be any police officers down there.
Well.
We don't have the force to send Rocco down there walking the green belt- ...
giving out tickets. So,
it is what it is.
So you're bringing the voice of a cold dose of reality, are ya?
Yep.
Okay. Thank you. Um, Councilor
Scott.
Sorry, can I just clarify? You're saying you wanna go with one and two
only, but you don't feel that you can enforce not allowing
three? So it seems-
Oh, what is the three? The ones that go 150?
Yeah. Yeah. 150.
28.
Yeah, it'll make a bigger mess when they hit somebody, so sure.
I, it's-
I, I, I'm not a fan of it anyway. I'm not, I, I was probably the only one
that opposed bikes and everything on the green belt.
But the more I think about it, we can't separate
disabled people, from that law, and
we can't, separate people that may be in rehabilitation
riding bikes and stuff like that. So I kinda had to change my
thought process. So, you know, I mean, there are a lot of people...
I, I fe- my fear is you have a lot of people down there walking with two or three
dogs
at a time, or two dogs at a time, and you have a bike coming at 30
miles an hour, and that's just a catastrophe waiting to
happen. And at what point, because we allow it, are we
held liable for lawsuits and everything else on the
green belt? And I guess that's a question for the city manager or
a good lawyer. So I don't, I don't know. So but I'll...
or I'll go ahead and support one, two, and three then.
So you're not-
'Cause it doesn't really matter. I mean, it just doesn't matter.
I thought you were gonna restrict the number of dogs.
Whoa, whoa.
Don't bring that up. Don't bring that up.
Ellen Clancy, did you get that?
Oh. Anyway, I did not say I was in favor of such a thing, but. All right.
So
all three of you are going with one, two, and three, which
is state plus.
Councilor West.
Okay, I guess I... Is it, has everybody else weighed in?
Oh, the matter.
I don't know.
No, I'm still listening to everybody's arguments.
Well, I, I would just stick with one and two because it's all done, ready to go.
And we spent so much time on this.
Um-
I mean, it could come on the agenda to be adopted next time for a first reading.
I don't... Is, does not, does disallowing, class
three affect a large population? Are you a
class three pers- just you?
They're out there.
He's here.
But you don't know.
Podium.
Yeah, and I wouldn't know.
People on TV are watching. You have to come to the podium to answer questions.
Yeah.
And reintroduce yourself.
I know who he is.
I bought my class two.
Mm-hmm.
It was upgradable to class three, so now I have a class
three. If I turn it off, it's a class nothing.
I know, it's better that way.
I bought my class, my other class two, which I took to Vermont and park
there, and I bought a kit from Europe, and I took off the speed governor
completely, so I can bike as fast as I want.
Dude.
Oh.
So that's no class
anymore.
Gee, Guzman.
Wear a helmet and a mouth guard.
Right.
Class four.
And in all those cities that I've used Rideshare, I have never
worn a helmet. Nobody does.
Oh.
For heaven sakes.
Yes, well.
Okay.
You can hear that.
Um, so we have Councilor West
advocating for one and two, let's be aligned with the
state. We have others saying, "Well, maybe we should go with three."
Um,
Councilor Coleman.
I, just, just-
King Solomon is needed here
... one and two. It's the state.
You're a one and two.
State.
So you're the tiebreaker 'cause Misha was also one and two.
Yeah.
Misha was a one and two. I am,
well-Basically, I wonder how long it will be before
the state actually has to say, "Look at e-bike technology.
Look what people are riding," and they make a change.
But at this point, I think we should stick with the state
And I would recommend that the law be changed
At the state level.
Okay.
Separate from us.
All right. Um, so it sounds as if, Scott, in
answer to the question whether or not to allow e-bikes on
the greenbelt in keeping with state's current policies
is what we're going to see as in ordinance
form. Yes?
That is correct.
Can we now talk about bikes on sidewalks?
We sure can. So, this was not, this was,
uh... Hold on one second here. Let me bring this
up. Here we go.
So this was another, request from the Bike Ped
Committee, that you actually already had a workshop on on September
9th.
Yeah.
Um, and at the time, you weren't ready to provide guidance, but you asked
for the, matter to be taken up again, prior to
the summer of 2026. So there's a few things that, I wanna add, but I
know the Bike, Ped chair wants to speak-
Very little
... to this-
Okay
... topic as well.
Bike Ped chair, please proceed.
So, Rosemary DeAngelis, Bike Ped Committee.
Uh, very little to, add to what we said
about the, about e-bikes o- on
the multi-use path, but I would just say that we
support bikes on sidewalks primarily for safety
reasons. That's the biggest factor that,
drives us in what's happening with bikes, and
needing to be on sidewalks. N- most people will
not ride on a sidewalk unless it's necessary, and
so it's in, in sections of the city, one section that we
discussed at the last, council meeting was the section
between Amato's and the AutoZone, at the bottom of
Brown's Hill, and that, that section
w- there's no place to ride on the street, so people
would just automatically get up on the sidewalk.
But, in instances where there's a bike path or where
people feel safe, they're going to typically ride
o- not ride on the sidewalk. Um, so
this is really areas where, where infrastructure or
lack thereof necessitates sidewalk use.
We talked about it, and I, I know what the ordinance says now,
but, just in clarifying, you know, children, especially
those trying to get to school, definitely need
safety, and many of them are now riding with their
parents, and so we don't wanna put kids up on the
sidewalk and require parents to be riding down in the
street. So as our infrastructure improves, there's less
need, but right now we believe the need is
high. And, I will go to, city
manager for additional comments. Thank you.
Thank you.
We- so, I'm not gonna run through kind of the pros and cons.
I think you've all been able to read that and can, and can discern those, on
your own. I'll just remind just a couple highlights,
that, when this was discussed previously, the public dire- or public works
director noted numerous other communities already allow bicyclists on sidewalks,
and that according to M- DOT data that they received, there did not appear to be
any increase in accidents with, pedestrians in those
communities that they were able to suss out.
Um, and while this isn't something that staff
is coming here to, to recommend, this isn't something that w- w- we also
oppose. However, it should be noted that, our
public works d- r- director did request that if this is something council is
interested in, that her preference would be
for, this to not, include e-bikes
and to have the use of all bikes
restricted, in areas where, there's
heavy, where there's, out- outdoor, dining
allowed because there's, there's a, there's a narrowing of the sidewalk there,
and that would c- have bikes competing with pedestrians and, and others.
And so she pointed to Saco as an, a example of, where
bikes are allowed on streets but prohibited in, in certain districts.
So that, that was her recommendation.
Um, and, Chief Ahearn is here if you have any questions.
As, as I think he noted last time, there's really no proactive enforcement
of this, just like the e-bike issue.
So,
e- even if you pass this and allo- and, or even if you don't pass this, it
is practically hard to enforce, and not something we're really
proactively looking at.
Okay. Um,
usually I don't ask the question first, but my quick question is does
Saco do that by ordinance? Do you know?
Yes.
Yes, they do.
Yep.
Oh, so it can be done. Thank you. Councilors, do you have
questions? Councilor West.
Does Saco differentiate between e-bikes and regular bikes on their
sidewalks?
Uh, that I'll have to look up real quick. I'm not sure.
I, I don't... I'm not sure that you can do it.
That-
Well, I think you can do it. I think your, your question probably is more about the
practicality, right? Is how is police g- gonna know?
I- if you change the definition, you'd have to carve out an, a, an exception,
obviously. Um-
Well, because state law says a bike is a bike.
Yep.
And you...
I guess we'd have to talk to the corporate, count- corporation counsel about it
because if a bike is a bike-
Saco's is just bikes in general, not just e-bikes.
It's-
Yeah, a bike, an e-bike is a bike
... it's, it's bikes in general.
And if you can have a bike on a sidewalk, you can probably have a class one and
class two.
Yeah, their restriction was just all bikes in the areas where there's,
where there's, those outdoor dining.
Any other council questions?
Mm. I, I just wanted to add to something that, city manager said.
A- again, Rosemary DeAngelis. Just-The, our, our
perception is that, if, if, if there was
outside dining, you know, bikes are just going to naturally get
off the sidewalk. I mean, I think it's fine prohibiting them wh-
whatever you want to, but it's not like somebody on a bicycle is gonna insist
on driving through tables and chairs, you know,
like, "I'm allowed on the bo-" You know, I mean, it just, it's just not a
reasonable thing. So people on bikes are, tend to
be responsible cyclists, and they're not really trying to do
something that's going to cause d- damage or
difficulty or challenge. Um, but, but they're looking for
safety. And so, we have some
o- we have some on sidewalk dining down in the Knightville
area. Uh, you know, it's fine if you wanted to say
that region, but I think that just ...
I think sometimes we have to just understand that people
are just gonna be responsible and do the right thing, and we don't have to regulate
everything. That's all.
Okay.
Thank you.
Okay. Um, any other... Councilor Coleman.
I remember when during the discussion we, was thinking
of not having cyclists on the
sidewalk on Ocean Street, you know,
from where it, where Barber Brothers and all of those-
Mm-hmm
... stores are, because of coming out of a store.
Mm-hmm.
And I can tell you because of the condos that are by Sia,
and this was
my age-
Mm-hmm
... but double on the sidewalk, and we all...
And didn't even use a bell that they were coming.
Right.
And I'm going-
So you have... So it sounds like you had like-
I didn't expect to see-
Yeah
... because we were kind of, like, window gazing at
one of the stores.
Mm-hmm.
And then, but not single file. No, no.
Two abreast.
Well-
Did, did we open this up for public comment?
We have-
Not yet.
Okay.
We're on councilor questions.
Yeah, and so-
Oh.
All right. So the-
Am I-
Thank you
... am I forgetting that we thought that there'd be certain areas of commerce-
Okay
... and like outdoor dining that-
So if I could just... If you-
Yeah.
It sounds like your question would be whether it makes sense to look at
certain areas to offer restrictions.
That was the discussion last time, and it wasn't decided.
Yeah. All right. Thank you. Any other councilor questions?
Public comment is open on this item. Any public comment on this item?
Oh, you are so brave, sir.
I'm quick.
Thank you.
Quick one. Um, I don't dare
ride-
Okay. You, you are still Phil Weinberg, right?
That's right. Yeah.
Yes.
Paris Street.
On Paris Street.
Thank you.
Yeah. Um-
80 years old.
Yeah.
That's right.
He's got every-
I even put that in my notes.
All right. Let the man speak.
Okay. Uh, I don't dare ride on
Broadway between the bridge and
Cottage. It's way too dangerous, and
also-
Yeah
... all around the mall.
Mm.
Those are the two areas that, yeah, I
wouldn't wanna go if I couldn't ride on the sidewalks.
Thank you.
Yes, between the bridge and Cottage. I've been on that sidewalk.
All right. Um, anyone else?
Super quick. Jeff Woodbury again.
I'd like to reiterate his point, because my girlfriend is
terrified of Broadway. And when we go
from, Broadway
Gardens, all she wants to do is get to the green belt as quickly and safely
as possible, which means she's gonna be riding the sidewalk almost
all the way.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Very carefully, but-
Yeah
... Broadway's terrifying to her and a lot of people.
I have some tricks for-
If you block them out of the sidewalk, you block them out of getting on the green
belt.
Getting... Mm-hmm.
Okay. Um, any more public comment on this one?
I don't see any. It's closed. Council, how do we
want to address whether or not to allow bicycles on city sidewalks?
Councilor Walker.
I would propose that we allow bicycles, all bicycles, on the sidewalk except
for the districts of Knightville and Mill Creek.
So entire districts, Knightville and Mill Creek.
Okay. That is a proposal. Um, it's not a formal
one. It's information for our city manager. Anyone else?
I think, again, it's one of those subjects it just doesn't matter.
I've never seen anybody get a ticket on a sidewalk-
Mm-hmm
... with a bicycle before, so it really doesn't matter. I don't support it.
But,
go ahead, ride on them. Nobody's gonna stop you.
You, you- So to be clear, you do not support-
No
... allowing bicycles on sidewalks?
No, I've seen too many people get hit.
Like, like, and, and to Jess's point, she's saying all
those businesses down there, which is a good idea, but, like, you come out of the
Petro's Market, you're coming out of a, out of a-
Oh, God
... Inco, and you start to walk out, and there's a bike flying by
you. Any of those little shops up there.
So if we're gonna include those ones, let's include that business district up
there, or any other small business district like, you
know, Thornton Heights has that little strip there.
You know, you come out of Chickpea, you're gonna get nailed. Is it Chickpea?
I don't know.
Yes.
Yes. Mr. Chickpea.
You know, places like that. So
people are trying to run businesses, and when people are walking out with
sandwiches or sodas and stuff like that, and you have...
And I know that Rose Marie is trying to say that bike is a
responsible. Yes, a lot of... Ah, but there are a lot of K****s out there
too. So I, I just have a, I have a problem with
it.
Who design bicycles. Okay.
All right. Other councilors, we need to give the city some type
of guidance. So far we have... Okay, Councilor
Scott.
I, I have to say, I'm terrified of the idea of allowing bicycles
on sidewalks, and have been in many situations where
it's been a pe- as a pedestrian, scary to have bicycles.
So I'm kind of more in favor of not allowing bicycles on
sidewalks. I do appreciate that there are some areas of the city-
Yeah
... like Cash Corner, that have major-
Um-
Boy
... transportation issues, and I, I
would be more in favor of having signage in
certain kind of byways of the city where we had a sign that says,
"Bicycles are allowed on side- on this sidewalk between X, Y,
Z," and allow that. But I, I just think there are so many
areas of the city... I know it's not very enforceable, but I just don't think
it's a great sort of principle to have, so.
Well, you are full of tricks.
Um, no, I mean your idea.
Oh.
Councilor Pryde. We'll let him go first this time.
Sure. Um, it's funny 'cause I think I suggested something like that
last time this came up.
Okay.
Um, and I, and I agree with, Councilor
Matthews, but I go the other way. If we're not going to enforce an
ordinance, why have it? But I also think the signage is
good for more than one reason, not only because the, you know, you can,
you can tell people that this is the place where it's appropriate, but you're also
warning walkers that this is a place where bikers are more likely to
be-
Hm. Interesting
... on the sidewalk. So I appreciate the signage
idea. I think that, you know, if it
were something that we could possibly enforce, sure, keep it out of
Knightville, keep it out of, the Mill Creek area.
But I mean, as, as Councilor Matthews pointed out, there's, you
know-
Yeah
... a lot of other places where we kind of have to do the same thing.
Um,
you know, I, I guess, I guess I'm all over the map
o- on this one. But for the most part I'm, I'm, I'm really
like, you know, let's let the kids ride on the s- on
the sidewalk, and maybe increase the age.
I don't know, but I'm just worried about the kids really-
Oh, yeah
... more than anything else.
Kids on the sidewalk.
Um, you know, I know that currently, I think if you're under 14-
Mm-hmm
... or 14 and under you can ride on the sidewalk.
Um, so we're already letting kids ride on the
sidewalks. You know, if they're gonna be with their
families, if they're gonna be,
you know, if they're 15 and riding to the high school through
Cash Corner,
I, I think they should be able to ride on the sidewalk.
Um, so I, I think, I, I... Where I really land is, yeah,
I think signage is great if that's where the council goes with this.
If having areas where it's cool that you can do it and they're signed, great, but
if there's enough support, I'm fine with it just being
allowed.
Well.
Madam Mayor.
Okay. Thanks for that input.
Well, that was a curve ball. 'Cause I thought you were going the other way.
Okay. I know. I'm make- I'm trying to keep track of things
here, and you threw me a curve ball. Okay, Councilor Walker.
I'd, I'd like to retract my, Knightville and,
where did I say? Mill Creek.
Oh, what?
Well, the only reason I suggested it was because of going off of our workshop
before, I thought that was the only way it had a, had a chance to pass.
But I mean, I believe, much to the bike ped committee's point, that
we should be able-- A cyclist should be allowed to ride on the
sidewalk wherever and whenever safety is a concern,
and that is my, that is my end goal. And so I offered Mill Creek and
Knightville as a way to get around the concerns that council had raised the last
time we discussed this, but if that is not a deterrent or that is not
an, a, not an advantage to, to taking this up, then I retract that
because I, I whole-
Okay
... wholeheartedly, whole-heartedly, as a rider myself who does
also ride on the sidewalk, looking at the police chief-
Mm.
... where I feel like I have to, I, I, I feel everybody, not just
children, should be able to ride on the sidewalk in Cash Corner without getting
smooshed.
Okay. Can I just say I'm totally malleable here?
Like,
it's, it's like, I mean, that's what I prefer-
No
... but, like, I-
No, you cannot say that.
I can't? Okay, fine. I won't s- I won't say it.
The city manager has to interpret all this.
I retract, I retract my malleability. So, well, all right.
Councilor West, I've lo- I'm starting to lose track of whether you've expressed an
opinion.
No, 'cause I, I just I'm malleable too, but I was thinking
just to try to get something done, what if we said we just leave it the way it is
but we expressly say we're not gonna enforce it?
I mean, we have-
That is-
I don't think we're allowed to say that, no
... requirements, for example. You don't wanna do that?
I, well, I don't think the council can l- literally say,
"Go ahead. Break that law."
Well, what if we just repeal the whole ordinance and we're silent?
What if we just do nothing? That would be a nothing place.
That's not against the law.
If... Yeah, it's not against the law. Right. We just repeal the ordinance.
It's probably the wisest thing to do.
Uh, if you-
The trouble is if we try signs, there's a, a lot of signs.
We're gonna keep coming in here saying-
Yeah, it's million-
... "Oh, I like that part. I like that part."
Yeah.
Yeah, right. But-
So i- in repealing an ordinance that currently says it's
illegal to ride on the sidewalk, you are in favor of making it legal,
yes?
I'm just kind of wanna go along with the majority.
Whatever the rest of you think-
I would say
... I'll do it.
Okay.
Can we just repeal the ordinance?
Mm-hmm. That's it. I don't know. What's it...
Yeah, but if we-
We're already, Carter and I are already outvoted, so, I mean, it's...
I, how, who? No one's outvoted from what I can tell.
One, two, three, four, right?
We can't figure out what to do. We're all in the-
I'm the only one that's very clear for it.
I think everyone else is like, "Eh."
I, I-
Look, Misha was pretty clear.
I, I, I'm for it. Like, if, if there's enough support for for it-
Okay
... I'm for getting rid of-
What-
But if there's not and we need to find another middle ground, I'm okay with
Carter's idea of signs.
Before I start hating my life. We have an awful lot of, we have an awful lot of
sidewalks with utility poles.
Well, yeah.
Just remember that.
Yeah, that's a great deterrent.
What does the repeal-
Great way to match it.
Is the repeal the ordinance something that we can
offer that makes any sense?
Um, I, I would assume so, because then you're not
expressly prohibiting it. I just don't know what the default is if there's a
state law that says unless-
Okay.
Is there a state law?
So I, I don't know. I'd have to-
How about this? This is a workshop.
We're not required to vote on anything.
We've given some ambiguous feedback to the city
manager. Perhaps you could explore it a little bit with the city
attorney and-
Yeah
... even if you don't bring it back to us as an ordinance, you could bring it back
in the city manager's report on, "So far I've discovered this,"
and then we
somehow have something, because we need to be
done. All right. I think
this part of our workshop is closed,
somewhat unsatisfactorily, but it is closed.
Thank you.
Can we move to review of workshop schedule?
Yeah, so, there's no, there's no new, workshop requests.
Uh, you see the list of workshops that are coming up.
There's a few items on the list that are not ready.
There's a few items that are ready.
Um, there's only a few more workshop slots left, in 2026 that
don't have something on it, so unless there's, particular guidance wants to
give on, scheduling of any of those, there's no action required of you
tonight.
Madam Mayor?
Yes.
I'd like to ask that we have pay as you throw on the agenda as a
workshop at some point in 2026.
All right. Ca- I think you're gonna need to do a workshop proposal.
Oh.
Even though it's already on the-
No, it's, it's on there.
Oh, wait. I'm sorry. I didn't see it.
That's, that's one of the ones that's ready to be scheduled.
Sorry.
Number five.
What a bad answer I just gave you.
Sorry, it's late.
All right, so it's ready to be scheduled.
Yeah.
So all right, let's... You trust the city manager and
I to figure out when we should-
Yeah
... schedule that? Thank you.
Anyone else? Anything? Anything?
All right, my beloved councilors.
I think we should adjourn.
I... Well, I just wanna say again that with regard to the city
facilities, I
believe we should put it on the agenda, every
agenda, and we, as a placeholder, and we don't
have to talk about it every time, but things are coming up,
and I'm very afraid that we, we are...
Uh, there's so many things and so many issues that we should discuss
if we want to try to keep things moving with our public
facilities
projects.
Okay.
Yeah.
May, may I respond to that? Is that okay?
I think my judgment is that most councilors would
agree with the substance of what you've said, that we need to keep talking about
this, as would our residents, who are expecting us to come up with some
conclusions and plan. Um, I, we know that we're
talking about it next meeting. Um, it would
not have worked to put it into this, this meeting.
Clearly.
So I, I just need to know, is it the will of the council that Scott
and I kind of keep in mind whenever it seems practicable
to put it in there, we will?
But the, the trouble is, for example, what got carried over was
three resolutions, three orders.
Mm-hmm.
And I've been wondering to myself, does that mean we can only talk
the context of those three if those are on the agenda?
I mean, we may wanna have a more general conversation about issues
related to the public facilities.
Right, and that's why it was made a workshop last ti- last week.
Yeah, and I would agree with doing that just in general. If there's, if you...
And you have the right to say, "We're not gonna do it tonight.
There's nothing new to discuss." But it all...
Then it gives us the right to talk about it.
So your vision is-
At least-
... it's a workshop.
If we're only gonna go one agenda-
A standing workshop
... at a time, can we put it on the next agenda? Can we do...
I mean, don't people feel like we need to be talking about this?
I do.
Yes.
Do you-
I support that.
Agreed.
And, and it is next week. It's on for next week.
I know it is.
So, okay.
And then we'll go one week at a time.
If next week we still think we have more things to talk about, then we just make-
Just, it, it is on next week, just so you all know.
Yeah. Yeah.
The, the consultants are coming forward-
Yeah
... to give you, updated information on, some
things that you asked for. So it, it, it will be on there in addition to the
things-
Okay. Okay
... that Councilor West noted.
All right.
Excellent.
So we're definitely next week,
unless we just wrap everything up next week, probably in
weeks to come.
It, it would be helpful if they-
Regularly
... to, I don't, we don't have to talk about it tonight or in the future, 'cause
it's the expectation that the design team is here and all the departments are here
every week just in case council wants to talk about something.
What do you wanna talk about? Because if you're gonna talk about something, you
probably want them there, but if we don't know what it is you're gonna ask, it's
kinda hard to have a conversation or, or give-
Mm-hmm
... or i- if you're, if it's a workshop, you're gonna give us feedback on
something, and without the design team or other staff here, it's hard to kind of,
um-
I, I don't think that is a good idea. I don't. I don't think that.
I think we should be able to have these conversations, yes, I agree with that, but
tying up staff and the design team's time will it just-
I-
... in case, I don't think that is, is a, is a good idea.
I think that we could take very specific questions we have, deliver them as a
result of the workshop, and then maybe at the next workshop they report
back.
Got it.
Yeah.
That would be how I would like to see it.
I think that's a good way to do it.
I like that.
I do too.
All right. Can we have a motion to adjourn this workshop?
So moved.
So moved by Councilor Pride. Seconded by Councilor
Walker. All in favor? Thank you very much, everyone.
Thank you.
Oh, we're adjourned. I guess I could stay put for...